---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Giving a sermon with a single sound
short_title: Giving a sermon with a single sound
type: entry
weight: 101
class: side-by-side
abstract: The Buddha explains the Dharma with one sound
object:
  - id: 1
---
### Sutra
The Buddha explains the Dharma with one sound,
And sentient beings each attain understanding according to their capacity.
Each one says the World-honored One is speaking his own language,
Through the exclusive attribute of [the Buddha’s] numinous power.

The Buddha preaches the Dharma with one sound,
And sentient beings each understand accordingly.
Everyone accepts and practices it, and receives its benefit,
Through the exclusive attribute of [the Buddha’s] numinous power.

The Buddha preaches the Dharma with one sound,
But some are afraid and some joyous.
Some generate revulsion [to the world of suffering] or eliminate their doubts,Through the exclusive attribute of [the Buddha’s] numinous power.

### Teisho

When the Buddha spoke, even though everyone heard the same voice, some merely developed an instinct for the teaching, some gained realization, and some found pacification of all their doubts—this is a special quality of the Buddha. The Buddha would teach in very simple, direct phrases that would touch each person in a different way. For example, upon hearing “All is empty,” a greedy person becomes terribly melancholy, thinking how sad it is that all these things he wants are after all empty. Those who are unlucky in whatever they do, for whom nothing comes out right no matter how they try it, might think, “Well that’s all right! If all is empty after all, it must be so hard for everyone! There’s no need to be so upset about it!” The very ambitious would hear “All is empty” and know that even if they have great prosperity and have gathered great wealth they will eventually die and see that none of it has any meaning. It gives them a chill. They see that they must help others and do something differently. Each person hears this one simple sentence directly put by the Buddha and feels it in a very different way. This is the very mysterious teaching.


{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References


## Bibliography

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 
{{< /q-class >}}
