---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Continuous mindfulness
short_title: Continuous mindfulness
type: entry
weight: 110
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 10
---

### Sutra
At this point the Buddha addressed Maitreya Bodhisattva, “You go inquire about Vimalakīrti’s illness.”  
Maitreya addressed the Buddha, “World-honored One, I dare not accept your instruction to go inquire about his illness. Why? I remember once in the past when I was explaining the practice of the stage of irreversibility for the heavenly king of the Tuṣita Heaven and his subordinates. At the time Vimalakīrti came and said to me,  
 “‘Maitreya, the World-honored One has bestowed on your noble person the prediction that you will achieve anuttarā samyak saṃbodhiin a single lifetime. What lifetime will you use to experience this prediction, past, future, or present? If a past life, then the past life is already extinguished. If a future life, then the future life has not arrived. If the present life, then the present life is nonabiding. It is as the Buddha has explained, “O bhikṣus, you are in this immediate present born, aged, and extinguished.”   
“‘If you experience this prediction with birthlessness, then the birthless is the primary status [of Hinayanist enlightenment]. Yet within that primary status there is no receiving the prediction, and also no attainment of anuttarā samyaksaṃbodhi.  
 “‘How, Maitreya, did you receive the prediction of [buddhahood in] a single lifetime? Did you receive the prediction from the generation of suchness, or did you receive the prediction from the extinction of suchness? “‘If you received the prediction by the generation of suchness, then [understand that] suchness is without generation. If you received the prediction by the extinction of suchness, then [understand that] suchness is without extinction.   
“‘All sentient beings are entirely suchlike, and all dharmas are also entirely suchlike. The assembly of sages and wise ones are also suchlike. Even you, Maitreya, are suchlike. If you received the prediction [of future buddhahood], all sentient beings should also receive it. Why? Suchness is nondual and nondifferentiated. If Maitreya attains anuttarā samyaksaṃbodhi, then all sentient beings should also all attain it. Why? All sentient beings are the characteristic of bodhi.  
 If Maitreya attains extinction, then all sentient beings should also all [attain] extinction. Why? The buddhas understand that all sentient beings are ultimately extinguished, which is the characteristic of nirvana, and cannot again be extinguished.   
“‘Therefore, Maitreya, do not inspire the gods with this teaching.  

### Teisho

Here we have this teaching of Vimalakirti on nonabiding. We think that awakening can be left for the future, but that is not possible. Awakening is only possible in this present moment. It makes no sense to claim that we will be able to experience awakening in a moment of the past or in a moment of the future. We can only be sharp and awake and ready in this very present moment. However, if that past is clarified and we are not caught on a hope of awakening in the future, then we are more likely to be able to sharpen in this present moment. If it is something we hold in our imagination or feel in a vague way like a memory, we are only imagining the superficial thing.

You must not cease in your constant, focused application. Even a small bit of water falling one drop at a time, such as water dripping from the eaves onto a stone below, wears away the stone drop by drop. Each time you look away from the present and say to yourself, “Oh I wish it were like this” or “Oh why can’t it be just like that,” the essence will get diluted until you’ve let go of it completely. It is just like making a spark with two sticks. We rub the sticks together and keep rubbing without stopping to get the heat that can then bring forth a spark. Then finally, with the friction of the sticks rubbing against each other there will be smoke, and the spark will come forth and start the paper scraps burning, and a fire can be built. If you are always stopping and resting as you do it, no matter how great a deep vow you have, the goal will not be realized. To do it without ceasing and to keep the efforts going all the way to completion is what is called making true efforts

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[10][chapter 4]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
