---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Tranquil extinction is bodhi (Nirvana is awakening)
short_title: Tranquil extinction is Bodhi
type: entry
weight: 111
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 11
---

### Sutra. 
“‘Truly, there is no one who generates the intention to achieve anuttarā samyaksaṃbodhi,and there is no one who retrogresses. Maitreya, you should have these gods forsake this discriminative view of bodhi. Why? myaksaṃbodhi,and there is no one who retro gresses. Maitreya, you should have these gods forsake this discriminative view of bodhi. Why?   
“‘Bodhi cannot be attained with the body, and it cannot be attained with the mind.   
“‘Extinction is bodhi, because of the extinction of the characteristics.   
“‘Non-contemplation is bodhi, because it transcends the conditions.   
“‘Non-practice is bodhi, because it is without recollection.   
“‘Eradication is bodhi,b ecause of renouncing the views. Transcendence is bodhi, because of the transcendence of false concepts.   
“‘Hindrances are bodhi, because of the hindrance of the vows.   
“‘Non-entry is bodhi, because of the absence of lustful attachment. Accordance is bodhi, because of accordance with suchness.   
“‘Abiding is bodhi,because of abiding [in the] Dharma-nature.   
“‘Approach is bodhi, because of the approach to the reality-limit.   
“‘Nonduality is bodhi, because of the transcendence of mind and dharmas.   
“‘Universal sameness is bodhi,because of universal sameness with space. “‘The unconditioned is bodhi, because of the absence of generation, abiding, and extinction.   
“‘Understanding is bodhi, because of the comprehension of the mental processes of sentient beings.   
“‘Non-assemblage is bodhi, because of the non-assemblage of the entrances (āyatanas, i.e., sensory capacities).   
“‘Non-aggregation is bodhi, because of the transcendence of the latent inﬂuences of the afﬂictions.  
 “‘The non-locative is bodhi, because of formlessness.   
“‘Provisional names are bodhi, because names are empty. “  
‘The [activities of the] conversion of suchness are bodhi, because of the nonexistence of grasping and forsaking. “‘The non-turbulent is bodhi, because of permanent composure.   
“‘Good serenity is bodhi, because of the purity of the natures. “‘Non-grasping is bodhi, because of the transcendence of objectiﬁed mentation.   
“‘Nondifferentiation is bodhi, because of the universal sameness of the dharmas.   
“‘Non-comparison is bodhi, because of the impossibility of analogy.   
“‘The subtle is bodhi, because of the difﬁculty of understanding the dharmas.’   

5. “World-honored One, when Vimalakīrti explained this Dharma, two hundred gods achieved the forbearance of the non arising of dharmas. Therefore, I cannot accept [your instruction] to go inquire about his illness.”  

### Teisho

Vimalakirti tells Maitreya that we are all undivided and without dualism in our mind from the origin, so we do not need to make efforts to become that way. In the beginning, all people are clear. But if we have added things on, believing we are of this quality and have that characteristic, we need to let go of those deluded ideas. To do that we have to make great efforts, not to become that clear mind but to let go of what we have constructed and added on to the clear mind that is already there. 

Thus Vimalakirti tells us: Do not add on any ideas about what it is to awaken. Do not hold on to anything called an awakening. Do not be attached to anything whatsoever. Do not add second associations and third associations to direct perceptions. Do not hold on to any idea about how hard you are working. That is all extra. Just sit without being caught on an idea of sitting, an idea of doing the practice, an idea of doing anything. Those ideas are what make it so difficult. Don’t give in to making extra associations to whatever you perceive. Just as water flows freely, moving past huge boulders or the roots of tree trunks, when we are free from being caught on anything at all, everything we see, hear, and feel is then the truth, because we are not caught on our ideas about things that we are perceiving and experiencing or by our second associations to those ideas. Be whatever comes, just as it is.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[11][Chapter 4]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
