---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Every step is the place of practice
short_title: Every step is the place of practice
type: entry
weight: 113
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 13
---

### Sutra

6. The Buddha told Radiance Ornament Youth, “You go inquire about Vimalakīrti’s illness.”
Radiance Ornament Youth addressed the Buddha, “World-honored One, I dare not accept your instruction to go inquire about his illness. Why? I remember once in the past, when I was coming out of the great city of Vaiśālī just as Vimalakīrti was entering the city. I immediately bowed and asked, ‘Retired scholar, from where are you coming?’
 “He answered me, ‘I have come from the place of enlightenment.’
“I asked, ‘Where is the place of enlightenment?’ 
“He answered, 
7. “‘Sincerity is the place of enlightenment, because of the absence of falsity. The generation of practice is the place of enlightenment, because it is able to discriminate things. Profound mind is the place of enlightenment, because of the increase in merit. The mind of bodhi(bodhicitta) is the place of enlightenment, because of the absence of error. 

8. “‘Charity is the place of enlightenment, because of not seeking after retribution (i.e., reward). Morality is the place of enlightenment, because of the fulﬁllment of vows. Forbearance is the place of enlightenment, because of the absence of any mental hindrance regarding sentient beings. Exertion is the place of enlightenment, because of not retrogressing. Meditation is the place of enlightenment, because of the pliable disciplining of the mind. Wisdom is the place of enlightenment, because of the manifest perception of the dharmas. 

9. “‘Sympathy is the place of enlightenment, because of the universal sameness of sentient beings. Compassion is the place of enlightenment, because of the forbearance of suffering. Joy is the place of enlightenment, because of taking pleasure in the Dharma. Equanimity is the place of enlightenment, because of the eradication of repugnance and affection. 

10. “‘The numinous penetrations are the place of enlightenment, because of the achievement of the six penetrations (i.e., supernatural abilities). Emancipation is the place of enlightenment, because of the ability to forsake. Skillful means are the place of enlightenment, because of the salvation of sentient beings. The four means of attraction are the place of enlightenment, because of the attraction (i.e., conversion) of sentient beings. Erudition is the place of enlightenment, because of practice according to one’s knowledge. Mental control is the place of enlightenment, because of the correct contemplation of the dharmas. The thirty-seven factors of enlightenment are the place of enlightenment, because of forsaking the conditioned dharmas. The truth is the place of enlightenment, because of not misleading the world. “‘Conditioned generation is the place of enlightenment, because ignorance and so forth through old age and death, are all unexhausted. The afﬂictions are bodhi,because of understanding according to actuality. 

11. “‘Sentient beings are the place of enlightenment, because of understanding no-self. 
“‘All dharmas are the place of enlightenment, because of understanding the emptiness of the dharmas. Subjugation of the Māras is the place of enlightenment, because of not being swayed. The triple world is the place of enlightenment, because of the absence of destinations. The lion’s roar is the place of enlightenment, because of the absence of fear. The [ten] powers, [four] fearlessnesses, and [eighteen] exclusive attributes are the place of enlightenment, because of the absence of transgressions. The three illuminations are the place of enlightenment, because of the absence of remaining hindrances. To understand all the dharmas in a single moment of thought is the place of enlightenment, because of the accomplishment of omniscience. 

12. “‘Thus, my good man, should the bodhisattva teach sentient beings according to the perfections. In all that is done, [down to every] lifting or placing of one’s foot, you should understand that all these come from the place of enlightenment and abide in the Buddha-Dharma.

### Teisho

This section, in which Kogon Doji tells why he does not want to go visit Vimalakirti, is being used to teach what a dojo actually is. A dojo is usually understood as a place of practice, a place where monks train. Sogenji, for example, is considered a dojo. However, Vimalakirti, teaching of the Mahayana, is not talking about a dojo as a location or a place where monks with shaved heads live in a cloistered area. Rather, he is telling us to not give rise to any unnecessary thoughts, even while in the very midst of life—a family life, a life in the world. This is the truer meaning of a dojo, a place where we never leave the truth and we never separate from the practice.

 A dojo is not a location or a place, but a state of mind where we do not let go of our practice, where we are not entertaining extraneous thinking. From morning until night, night until morning, our state of mind cannot be stopped or caught, but must be without gaps and without pauses. This is because in our everyday life and work, that living, flowing state of mind enables us to see how best to do things: to make decisions and act in a natural way that results in the best work. Unless we carefully stay in this fresh, ongoing flow, we get caught. We get out of bed, we do chanting, we do zazen, we do sanzen, we clean, we eat, without stopping in between. We continue without a break, and as we get used to it we see this is the best way to live and to work. When we are taking a rest, we rest completely. When we are working, we work totally and completely. The deep profound mind is the dojo. 
 
The dojo is that very determination to put others’ liberation ahead of our own. Working for others without ceasing, we are simultaneously polishing our own deepest wisdom and state of mind. We vow to offer our lives to everyone, while continuing to polish and deepen our own understanding. This is the deep vow of the bodhisattva. The dojo is the honest mind. The dojo is  the purified mind. The dojo is the mind of offering all for the liberation of other beings, even ahead of our own deep liberation. All of these being realized is the dojo. Deepen to the place where you are practicing continuously, without any sense of even practicing. This state of mind in which being empathetic and compassionate with all living beings is your prime concern— this is the way of the bodhisattva, and this state of mind is the dojo. 

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[12, 13][chapter 4]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
