---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Dharma joy, dharma ecstasy
short_title: Dharma joy, dharma ecstasy
type: entry
weight: 114
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 14
---

### Sutra
“The Goddess asked, ‘What is the joy of the Dharma’? 
“VImalakirti answered, ‘Joy is to always trust the Buddha.  
Joy is to desire to hear the Dharma.  
Joy is to make offerings to the assembly.  
Joy is to transcend the five desires.  
Joy is to contemplate the five skandhas as vengeful bandits.  
Joy is to contemplate the four elements as poisonous snakes.   
Joy is to contemplate the interior sensory capacities as being like empty aggregations.  
Joy is to maintain one’s intention for enlightenment in all situations.  
Joy is to benefit sentient beings.  
Joy is to revere teachers.  
Joy is the extensive practice of charity.  
Joy is the firm maintenance of the precepts.  
Joy is forbearance and pliability.  
Joy is the vigorous accumulation of good roots.  
Joy is the lack of disturbance in meditation.  
Joy is to transcend the defilements in wisdom.  
Joy is to disseminate bodhicitta.  
Joy is the subjugation of the host of Māras.  
Joy is the eradication of the afflictions.  
Joy is purification of the countries of the buddhas.  
Joy is the accomplishment of the [thirty-two primary] characteristics and [eighty subsidiary] marks, based on the cultivation of the merits.  
Joy is ornamentation of the place of enlightenment.  
Joy is to hear the profound Dharma without fear.  
Joy is the three emancipations and not to take the pleasure [of ultimate enlightenment] at an inappropriate time.  
Joy is to associate with fellow trainees.  
Joy is for one’s mind to be without hindrance in the midst of those [who are] not one’s fellow trainees.  
Joy is to defend against evil friends.  
Joy is to associate closely with good friends.  
Joy is to be happy and pure in mind.  
Joy is to cultivate the immeasurable factors of enlightenment.
These are the bodhisattva’s joy in the Dharma.

### Teisho

In this section, Vimalakirti teaches about dharma joy. The usual pleasures of the world arise from something external, such as listening to music. But dharma joy comes forth from within. Dancing from our utmost inner joy, when we cannot help but dance, is not the same thing as dancing to the sound of an external musical instrument. The same is true with the singing that wells up from deep inside us out of our great joy. 

We all have this deeper joy, but because we are always looking externally, we don’t realize this state of mind. As Dogen has said, if we are simple and natural in mind, we perceive with our senses, and this joy is a matter of course. We have the sun that rises in the east and the moon that sets in the west. We have the cocks that crow at dawn, and every four years we have a leap year. The joy of these proceeding in their natural order is the dharma joy. 
The inner joy of the sangha is knowing that the deep True mind is present in all people. There is no one who is not endowed from the origin with this
 clear mind. There is no difference in the depth of mind of any person, and we live in the joy of knowing that truth.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[14][chapter 4]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
