---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: One lamp, ten thousand lamps, endless lamps
short_title: One lamp, ten thousand lamps, endless lamps
type: entry
weight: 115
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 15
---

### Sutra 
18. “Vimalakīrti said, ‘Sisters, there is a Dharma called “inexhaustible lamp.” You should study it. The inexhaustible lamp is like a lamp that ignites a hundred thousand lamps, illuminating all darkness with an illumination that is never exhausted. Thus, sisters, if a single bodhisattva guides a hundred thousand sentient beings, causing them to generate the intention to achieve anuttarā samyaksaṃbodhi,that bodhisattva’s intention to achieve enlightenment will also never be extinguished.   
“‘With each teaching of the Dharma all the good dharmas are naturally increased. This is what is called the “inexhaustible lamp.” Although you reside in Māra’s palace, with this inexhaustible lamp you can cause innumerable gods and goddesses to generate the intention to achieve anuttarā samyaksaṃbodhi. Thereby you will repay the Buddha’s kindness and also greatly beneﬁt all sentient beings.’

### Teisho

Once we have realized this truth, how can we can live in the world of so many external pleasures and still keep this greater truth alive? How can we keep it in mind? If we return to a world of desire and pleasure, we might forget what we have learned. In response to this question, Vimalakirti, gave the teaching of the inexhaustible lamp. Just as the flame of one lamp can touch and light hundreds and then thousands of other lamps, so our awakening to the truth brings the same awakening to many others’ minds as well. 

Because others don’t yet know the truth, we must share this light so that a hundred to a thousand to ten thousand will also be able to realize it as well. For the bodhisattva’s light of truth to shine brightly, we have to continually make all possible efforts. We have to bring this truth to all people, and then you will not fall again into superficial reliance on external pleasures. He tells them to hold this teaching precious and share what they have learned with all others.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[15][chapter 4]
## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
