---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Harmony, respect, purity, tranquility
short_title: Harmony, respect, purity, tranquility
type: entry
weight: 116
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 16
---
### Sutra

1. At this point the Buddha addressed Mañjuśrī, “You go inquire about Vimalakīrti’s illness.” 

Mañjuśrī addressed the Buddha, “World-honored One, that superior one is difﬁcult to respond to. 
“He has profoundly attained the true characteristic, and he is good at explaining the essentials of the Dharma. 
“His eloquence is unhampered, and his wisdom is unhindered. 
“He completely understands all the deportments of the bodhisattvas, and he has entered into all the secret storehouses of the buddhas. 
“He has subjugated the host of Māras, and disports himself in the numinous penetrations. He has already attained perfection in his wisdom and skillful means.
“Nevertheless, I will accept your sagely purport and proceed to inquire about his illness.” 

Thereupon the bodhisattvas, great disciples, Indras, Brahmās, and the four heavenly kings in the assembly all thought, “Now these two great bodhisattvas Mañjuśrī and Vimalakīrti will have a discussion. They will certainly explain a wondrous Dharma.”

At the time eight thousand bodhisattvas, ﬁve hundred śrā vakas, and a hundred thousand gods all wanted to follow along. 
Mañjuśrī and the congregation of bodhisattvas and great disciples, with the gods reverentially surrounding them, then entered the great city of Vaiśālī.

 3. At that time the Elder Vimalakīrti thought, “Now Mañjuśrī and a great congregation is coming.” 
Then with his numinous power he emptied out his room, removing what was there as well as his servants. He left only a single couch, upon which he reclined in his illness. 


### Teisho

When we enter the tea room, we see only the calligraphy scroll and the flowers, with the sound of the boiling teakettle, like wind in the pines. The wonderful fragrance of the incense greets our nose, and we taste the delicious tea. With these our mind and body are purified; this is the tea path of wabi and sabi. All of our six senses and their roots are purified; the qualities of harmony, respect, pruity, and tranquility are realized. 

The room of Vimalakirti inspired this way of tea. The room of Vimalakirti was pure, and so were his heart and his mind; with this purity he received the representative from the Buddha, Manjusri bodhisattva. Manjusri did not add in the slightest thought; in accordance with the mind of the Buddha, he encountered Vimalakirti. With a truly clear and pure mind he arrived at the room of Vimalakirti. 

Vimalakirti is the one who gave birth to the tea room garden, a small garden outside the tea room that is like the one written about in the Vimalakirti Sutra. Vimalakirti’s room is called a hojo. It is the size of four and one half tatami mats, just big enough for a human to live in the least possible space. Vimalakirti was sick in such a room when Manjusri came to visit with many Bodhisattvas, but there was nothing at all in the room. Vimalakirti was just burning incense and waiting. In the tea ceremony as well, nothing extra is added. There is only the fragrance of incense and flowers; everything else is empty. Thus is the empty mind of the tea master expressed. The guests purify themselves by washing their hands at the rock basin and then enter with a purified mind.

At the doorway to the tea ceremony room a fan is placed on the tatami, marking a definite entrance. Then we go to the tokonoma, the place where even in a regular house we find a space for our mind to become settled. Our house is a place to rest our tired body, but it also has to be a place to find peace and a settled mind. The One Drop Zendos are also places where we can respect each other and find peace. The tokonoma was originally a Buddha altar, and that is why incense is offered to the Buddha’s words that hang there, and light is provided to light those words and our travel. To the right is a candle, to the left is water, and in the middle is an incense burner.

Hung in the middle of the tokonoma are the Buddha’s or Patriarchs’ phrases. They always hang there, providing a place of refuge for our mind. The words are a resting place, a staff for our mind, so we can sit down silently. In the tea room the tokonoma is for bowing to and honoring, not as a matter of form but from the true depths of our mind. If we always do that with respect for all people who share this same deep mind, we will all be awakened to that.
Then we look at each tea utensil very seriously, examining it and seeing the value in each one. The beauty and the flavor of each has to be looked at carefully to see its highest quality. We can’t just look vaguely; there is no exchange of mind in that. 

A scholar of justice once said to his students, “Do you know that justice and law are the most feared subjects? But they are only about respecting society and the people in it, not about studying punishment. You have to see all things clearly before you start this study. Go and see things that were used as tools before the time of Christ, look at things in the museums and how they were used. You have to learn how to see things deeply. If you can’t pray for the best for society, you can’t understand justice. We have to study all things and see them well to know what will be useful and best for each person.”

We look carefully at each individual tea bowl. We touch the life energy of one flower in a vase. We smell the incense and feel the warmth of the water, and there our very mind’s depth is warmed as well. Not as things but as real live people we greet these utensils, and our deep respect grows and is cultivated.
As we give our mind to each and every thing, we know the source of peace and harmony. It is not only about respecting people and character, but so often we can’t even do that. We are always judging the ways of others or their past deeds or their bad habits. We are always looking at their weaknesses. But if we do that we can’t truthfully respect them. As Jo Fukyo Bodhisattva did, we have to let go of all ideas of good and bad before we can truly respect someone, and we can’t enter the tea room sincerely unless we are peaceful in our own mind. We must have a mind like a mirror that simply reflects and does not judge. Then we can see in the same way as God, who gives rain equally to good people and bad, and realize that we have that very same mind inside us.

When we let go of everything we have accumulated, we can see directly what is actually there. Then we can use our experiences and knowledge without mistake, for all beings and for all of society. For this we have to purify that mind, this clear **“Harmony, respect, purity, tranquillity.”**

As the Buddha said, we have to extinguish the flames of greed, extinguish the flames of ignorance, and extinguish the flames of anger, and then we will know nirvana’s tranquillity. If we realize the true source of our mind, we know this pure and clear place, and from there we respect all beings. This is the source of peace for the whole world.

“Harmony, respect, purity, tranquillity.”

Not just for tea ceremony, but as the source of peace for all humankind.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References


## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
