---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Though even a thousand eyes look, still it cannot be seen
short_title: Though even a thousand eyes look, still it cannot be seen
type: entry
weight: 117
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 17
---

### Sutra 

4. Mañjuśrī entered the house, and he saw the room was empty, with [Vimalakīrti] lying alone on a single couch.   
Then Vimalakīrti said, “Welcome, Mañjuśrī. You have come with the characteristic of not coming; you see with the characteristic of not seeing.”   
Mañjuśrī said, “So it is, retired scholar. If one has come, there is no more coming. If one has gone, there is no more going. Why? To come is to come from nowhere; to go is to proceed nowhere. That which can be seen is then invisible.   
5. “But enough of this matter. Retired scholar, can this illness be forborn? In its treatment is it diminished, so as not to increase? The World-honored One has made immeasurable courteous inquiries about you.   
6. “Retired scholar, what is the cause from which this illness arises? Has it been affecting you long? How will it be extinguished?   
Vimalakīrti said, “From stupidity there is affection, and hence the generation of my illness (or: the illness of self). Since all sentient beings are ill, therefore I am ill. If the illness of all sentient beings were extinguished, then my illness would be extinguished. Why? Bodhisattvas enter samsara on behalf of sentient beings. Because there is samsara, there is illness. If sentient beings were able to transcend illness, then bodhisattvas would not also be ill.   
7. “It is like an elder whose only son becomes ill, and the parents become ill as well. If the son recovers from the illness, the parents also recover. Bodhisattvas are like this. They have affection for sentient beings as if for their own children. When sentient beings are ill the bodhisattvas are ill also, and when sentient beings recover from their illness the bodhisattvas recover also.”   
He also said, “From what cause does this illness arise? The illness of bodhisattvas arises from great compassion.”   
8. Mañjuśrī said, “Retired scholar, why is this room empty, with no servants?”  
 Vimalakīrti said, “The countries of the buddhas are also all empty.”  
 [Mañjuśrī] asked, “With what was it emptied?”  
[Vimalakīrti] answered, “It was emptied with emptiness.”   
[Mañjuśrī] asked further, “How can emptiness use emptiness?”   
[Vimalakīrti] answered, “It is empty through nondiscriminating emptiness.”   
[Mañjuśrī] asked further, “Can emptiness be discriminated?”   
[Vimalakīrti] answered, “Discrimination is also empty.”  
 [Mañjuśrī] asked further, “Where should emptiness be sought?”   
[Vimalakīrti] answered, “It should be sought within the sixty-two [heterodox] views.”   
[Mañjuśrī] asked further, “Where should the sixty-two views be sought?”   
[Vimalakīrti] answered, “They should be sought within the emancipation of the buddhas.”   
[Mañjuśrī] asked further, “Where should the emancipation of the buddhas be sought?”   
[Vimalakīrti] answered, “It should be sought within the mental processes of all sentient beings.”

### Teisho

When Manjusri entered Vimalakirti’s room, it was empty of furnishings except for one bed. The state of mind of satori was overflowing everywhere. Vimalakirti welcomed him: “You did well to come, Manjusri, and even though you come, there is no coming. No sense of your having come. Nor is there any awareness in your mind of having arrived. Who appears is not to be seen.” When we visit someone and are wondering what to say, we are lost in delusion. Without thought, everything is huge and natural. It is not about wondering in advance what kind of greetings to make. This is how Manjusri came, totally naturally, and how Vimalakirti perceived, welcomed, and responded to him. This unattached way of seeing is the state of mind of satori.

Zen is not materialism, nor is it idealism. That which is being seen and that which is seeing it are one, a perfectly matched whole. In this the actuality is manifested; the world, as it is, is me. The world and I are not separate; there is no such division. When I see the world, where I am is clear, but if I don’t see it, then where am I? Where does the world go? If “I” don’t see the world, there is no “I.” This is the state of mind of zazen, the actuality, the world of Buddha nature and our original face.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[17][chapter 5]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
