---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: The four major elements have no master, and the body has no “I"
short_title: The four major elements have no master
type: entry
weight: 119
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 19
---

### Sutra
9. Mañjuśrī said, “Retired scholar, what characteristics does your illness have?”   
Vimalakīrti said, “My illness is without form, invisible.”  
 [Mañjuśrī] asked further, “Is this an illness of body or of mind?”   
[Vimalakīrti] said, “It is not of the body, since the body transcends characteristics. Nor is it of the mind, since the mind is like a phantasm.”   
[Mañjuśrī] asked further, “Of the four elements of earth, water, ﬁre, and air, to which element does this illness belong?”   
[Vimalakīrti] answered, “This illness is not of the earth element, but neither does it transcend the earth element. The water, ﬁre, and wind elements are likewise. However, the illnesses of sentient beings arise from the four elements, and because they are ill I am ill.”   

### Teisho
Manjusri asks Vimalakirti what type of sickness he is suffering from. Vimalakirti replies that the wounded state of society is the cause of his illness. A doctor can tell us if an illness has to do with our stomach, our kidneys, or our liver, but the body is not the cause of sickness in this case. Vimalakirti’s sickness has no form. Vimalakirti has forgotten his body, so physical symptoms are not present. And as for the cause being mental, our mind is like waves on the ocean, so how can that which is always changing be sick? It may look bad for a moment, but then that changes immediately. In one mind moment we may be happy and joyful, but then that changes as well. We are never completely happy and joyful, and we are never completely miserable and depressed. People sometimes think that zazen will make them feel better, but it doesn’t work like that. It would be like trying to calm waves. If we wish to calm them, then we have to leave them alone; the more we try to do anything to them, the more they are disrupted. 

Manjusri then questions Vimalakirti further about the elements of his illness, since his first line of interrogation about physical and mental was unsuccessful; he was getting nowhere. His question reflects the way of thinking in India at that time, where all things were considered to be made up of the four elements of earth, water, ﬁre, and air. For example, our body temperature is considered to be the element of fire. We are always changing, and that is considered to be the element of wind. Our bones and our flesh, are they sick, perhaps? Or is it your blood and your lymph nodes that are sick? Are you sick in your breath, or is your temperature very low perhaps? He asks Vimalakirti like this about his sickness and these possible symptoms. But Vimalakirti answers that he is sick because everyone is so disturbed. People in the world are sick, and he wants them to be better. That is his sickness. His four elements are doing just fine. 

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[18, 19][chapter 5]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
