---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: The Direct mind is the Pure land
short_title: The Direct mind is the Pure land
type: entry
weight: 102
class: side-by-side
abstract: The mind of bodhi (bodhicitta - the intention to achieve perfect enlightenment) is the bodhisattva’s pure land
object:
  - id: 2
---
### Sutra
“A profound mind is the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattva attains buddhahood, it is sentient beings who are complete in merit that come to be born in his country.

“The mind of bodhi (bodhicitta, i.e., the intention to achieve perfect enlightenment) is the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattva achieves buddhahood, sentient beings of the Mahayana come to be born in his country.

“Charity (dāna) is the bodhisattva’s pure land—all sentient beings capable of renunciation come to be born in his country.

“Morality (śīla, lit., “maintaining the precepts”) is the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattva achieves buddhahood, sentient beings who have fulfilled their vows to practice the path of the ten types of good come to be born in his country.

“Forbearance (kṣānti) is the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattva achieves buddhahood, sentient beings who have ornamented themselves with the thirty-two marks [of a buddha] come to be born in his country.

“Exertion (vīrya) is the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattva achieves buddhahood, sentient beings who have energetically cultivated all the [types of] merit come to be born in his country.

“Meditation (dhyāna) is the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattvaachieves buddhahood, sentient beings who control their minds and keep them undisturbed come to be born in his country.

“Wisdom (prajnā) is the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattva achieves buddhahood, sentient beings who [have achieved] correct concentration come to be born in his country.

“The four unlimited states of mind (i.e., the brāhma-vihāras) are the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattva achieves buddhahood, sentient beings who have developed sympathy, compassion, joy, and equanimity come to be born in his pure land.

“The four means of attraction are the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattva achieves buddhahood, sentient beings who have been attractedthrough his emancipation come to be born in his country.

“Skillful means are the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattva achieves buddhahood, sentient beings whose skillful means are without hindrance regarding all the the dharmas come to be born in his country.

“The thirty-seven factors of enlightenment are the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattva achieves buddhahood, sentient beings who [have accomplished the] foundations of mindfulness, correct exertions, numinous capabilities, faculties, powers, and the noble path come to be born in his country.

“The attitude of rededication [of merit] is the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattva achieves buddhahood, he attains a country that is complete in all [forms of] merit.

“Explaining how to eliminate the eight difficult realms [where the Buddha and Dharma are unknown] is the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattva achieves buddhahood, his country is without the three evil destinations and eight difficult realms.

“Maintaining one’s own practice of the precepts without reviling the deficiencies of others is the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattva achieves buddhahood, his country is without the names (i.e., without even the words) ‘violation’ and ‘prohibition.’

“The ten goods are the bodhisattva’s pure land—when the bodhisattva achieves buddhahood, sentient beings whose lifespans are not interrupted, who are very wealthy, who are chaste, whose words are truthful, who always use gentle language, who do not isolate themselves from their subordinates and who are good at resolving disputes, whose words are always beneficial, who are not jealous, who are not prone to anger, and who have correct views—[all these types of sentient beings] come to be born in his country.



### Teisho

For the construction of the Buddha lands—of a world that is truly peaceful—the Buddha teaches the most important points. Each person must, first, be direct in mind. Realizing that clarity and purity of Original mind is the Pure Land of the Bodhisattva. Then people must also realize the deep, profound Mind—that Mind that sees all things as Buddha nature. People must have the conception of the spirit of enlightenment; this is the Bodhisattva Mind. These three together--the Direct mind, the Profound Mind, and the Bodhisattva Mind--are the mind of zero, that Mind that is purified and clarified and free from any taint of ego. 

As Rinzai has put it, “The clean, pure light in a single moment of our mind.” This is not a Buddha which is far away, some place in the sky, but that very Mind within each of us with which everyone has been born. The Direct Mind is the Pure Land of the Bodhisattva. When we are living in that deep, Profound Mind all day long, seeing the stars blinking and the moon radiantly shining, the whole universe is holding up everything! There is nothing without purpose and value, and everything is connected in Oneness. This whole universe is the Buddha land as it is—a world beyond any kind of discrimination or ego attachment. This is the deep, Profound Mind which is the Pure Land of the Bodhisattvas. And the Mind of the Bodhisattva sees this world so full of suffering people and gives everything to awaken all beings to that Way of the Bodhisattva. 

So many people are working for change in this world, but how many also review their own behavior and make changes within? If your own mind is filled with confusion and darkness, that can only make more problems in the world. Yet if there is one truly peaceful person, that person will affect all others that come in contact with them. If we make an enemy out of everyone who does not agree with us, that will not resolve anything. We have to first go within; we have to review our own behavior and our own way of being inwardly. When we become peaceful and that peace will ripple out and touch everyone else.



{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

{{< /q-class >}}
