---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Realize the nonbirth and nonextinction of all things
short_title: Realize the nonbirth and nonextinction of all things
type: entry
weight: 120
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 20
---

### Sutra
1. At this point Śāriputra saw that there were no seats in the room. He thought, “Where will this congregation of bodhisattvas and great disciples sit?”  
The Elder Vimalakīrti knew what he was thinking and said to Śāriputra, “Which is it, sir—did you come for the Dharma or come seeking a seat?”  
Śāriputra said, “I came for the Dharma, not for a seat.”  

2. Vimalakīrti said, “O Śāriputra, those who seek the Dharma should begrudge neither body nor life. How much more so a seat!  
“To seek the Dharma is not a seeking in the context of form, sensation, concept, processes, and consciousness, nor a seeking in the context of the realms (dhātus) and entrances (āyatanas).  
“[To seek the Dharma] is not a seeking in the context of [the three realms of] desire, form, and formlessness. 

3. “O Śāriputra, in seeking the Dharma one should not be attached to the Buddha in seeking, nor be attached to the Dharma in seeking, nor be attached to the congregation [of the Sangha] in seeking. In seeking the Dharma, one should seek without recognizing suffering, one should seek without cutting off the accumulation [of suffering], one should seek without contriving the complete realization and cultivation of the path. Why? The Dharma is without contrived theories. If one says ‘I will recognize suffering, cut off the accumulation [of suffering], and realize the extinction [of suffering] and cultivate the path,’ this would be a contrived theory and not to seek the Dharma.   

“O Śāriputra, the Dharma is named extinction: if one practices generation and extinction this is to seek generation and extinction, not to seek the Dharma.   
“The Dharma is named the undeﬁled: if the dharmas, up to and including nirvana, are deﬁled, then this is deﬁled attachment and not to seek the Dharma.   
“The Dharma is without any locus of its practice: if one practices in the Dharma, this is a locus of practice and not to seek the Dharma.   
The Dharma is without grasping and forsaking: if one grasps and forsakes the Dharma, then this is grasping and forsaking and not to seek the Dharma.

### Teisho

Sariputra had come to Vimalakirti’s room where there were many thousands of beings and asked where everyone would sit. Vimalakirti replied, “Reverend Sariputra, did you come here for the sake of the Dharma, or did you come here for the sake of a chair?” The Dharma is about forgetting your body completely

At first we notice our body so much in zazen. But eventually we even forget we have a body. We lose track of every kind of thought. We become completely clear, with a state of mind which is equanimous. This is how it works when we are not holding on to any idea about what we are doing.

The Dharma is to let go of everything, even letting go of our own idea that we are practicing. We reach a state where are not even thinking that we are doing something called “practice,” like an athlete who isn’t thinking that she’s making a great play or a musician who isn’t thinking that he’s making great music. In our daily life when we are doing our very best, our deepest and most effective work, we have forgotten our body and our thoughts completely. 
{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[20][chapter 6]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
