---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Thought after thought is not separate from mind
short_title: Thought after thought is not separate from mind
type: entry
weight: 121
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 21
---

### Sutra
 4. “The Dharma is without locus: if one is attached to locus, this is to be attached to locus and not to seek the Dharma.   
“The Dharma is named ‘without characteristics’: if one’s understanding accords with characteristics, this is to seek characteristics and not to seek the Dharma.   
“One cannot abide in the Dharma: if one abides in the Dharma, this is to abide in the Dharma and not to seek the Dharma. 
“One cannot see, hear, sense, or know the Dharma: if one practices seeing, hearing, sensing, and knowing, this is seeing, hearing, sensing, and knowing and not to seek the Dharma.

 5. The Dharma is named the unconditioned: if one practices [within] the conditioned, this is to seek the conditioned and not to seek the Dharma. 
“Therefore, Śāriputra, if one seeks the Dharma one should be without seeking regarding all the dharmas.”   
When he spoke these words, ﬁve hundred gods attained purity of the Dharma eye with regard to the dharmas.   

### Teisho

The thoughts that are necessary for doing things are not so many; they’re relatively few compared to the huge number of thoughts that come up as soon as we sit. We’re astonished by how many thoughts are suddenly buzzing around in our head, as if we had broken open a hive of bees. It’s also kind of like we have a huge puddle of methane gas in our brain with all of these fermenting thoughts. And we get addicted to this methane gas, wanting to stay caught on our thoughts. We have to replace the gas with fresh air into this by holding on to nothing at all–not just thinking that we should be holding on to nothing at all, but actually holding on to nothing at all, and this is not so easy. Th e thoughts keep pouring in and pouring in and pouring in.

If it is something of form that we are trying to move out of our way, an object or material thing, we can just push it to the side, move it away. But in our mind it is so hard to push away a persistent thought. For this we have to use wisdom. Wisdom is something like a mother in a store with her child who is demanding that his mother buy a certain thing, even if he has to scream and shout until she finally gives up and does it. But a wise mother will simply, quickly, turn the child’s attention to something completely different. And suddenly the child will have totally forgotten that he was upset, and what he was upset about. Suddenly the crying stops while the new external interest is explored. We have to be able to liberate ourselves from the thoughts that we are caught on, or we cannot liberate others.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[21][chapter 6]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
