---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Sentient beings are numberless, I vow to liberate them
short_title: Sentient beings are numberless, I vow to liberate them
type: entry
weight: 122
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 22
---

### Sutra 

10. Vimalakīrti said, “O Śāriputra, the buddhas and bodhisattvas have an emancipation called ‘inconceivable.’ For a bodhisattva residing in this emancipation, the vastness of [Mount] Sumeru can be placed within a mustard seed without [either of them] increasing or decreasing in size. Sumeru, king of mountains, will remain in appearance as before, and the gods of the [heavens of the four heavenly kings and the Trayastriṃśa [Heaven] will not sense or know their own entry [into the mustard seed]. Only those one is trying to save will see Sumeru enter into the mustard seed. This is called abiding in the teaching of inconceivable emancipation. 

11. “Also, [a bodhisattva] may cause the waters of the four great oceans to enter into a single pore.  
 “[The bodhisattva does so] without discomforting the ﬁsh, turtles, tortoises, crocodiles, and [other] aquatic life forms, and the fundamental characteristics of those great oceans [remain] as before. The dragons, demonic spirits, and asuras do not realize that they have entered [into the single pore]. At this, the sentient beings [just mentioned] are not discomforted. 

12. “Furthermore, Śāriputra, a bodhisattva residing in inconceivable emancipation who eradicates grasping of the great trimegachiliocosm does so just like a potter grasping a wheel in his right palm: were he to throw it past world-systems as numerous as the grains of sand in the Ganges River, the sentient beings within [that great trimegachiliocosm] would be unaware of where they had gone. Also, when it returns to its original location, none of them would have any conception of having gone and returned, and the fundamental characteristics of this world-system would be as before. 

13. “Furthermore, Śāriputra, if there are sentient beings who can be saved through their desire for longevity, a bodhisattva will extend seven days into an entire kalpa and cause those sentient beings to consider it a kalpa. If there are sentient beings who can be saved through their desire for brevity of lifespan, a bodhisattva will compress an entire kalpainto seven days and cause those sentient beings to consider it [only] seven days. 

14. “Furthermore, Śāriputra, a bodhisattva who resides in inconceivable emancipation can assemble the ornaments of all the buddha lands in a single country to manifest them to sentient beings.   
“Furthermore, a bodhisattva can take the sentient beings of a buddha land in the right palm and ﬂy to all ten directions, showing them everything, without moving from the original location.  
 “Furthermore, Śāriputra, a bodhisattva can make visible in a single pore all the articles offered to the buddhas by [all] the sentient beings throughout the ten directions. Also, he can make visible all the suns, moons, and constellations of the countries of the ten directions. 
“Furthermore, Śāriputra, a bodhisattva can without physical harm inhale through the mouth all the winds of the worlds in the ten directions, and the trees outside [the bodhisattva] will not be damaged [by the winds]. 

### Teisho

If we simply open our mind to this truth of the Mahayaha, we can see what Vimalakirti is saying here. A parable in the Bible expresses this as well: “Unless a kernel of wheat falls to the ground and dies, it remains only a single seed. But if it dies, it produces many seeds.” The seed is encased in a hard shell, just like the hard shell of ego that surrounds us. The shell needs to break for the seed to germinate and produce new life. Likewise, when a mother hen produces an egg and sits on it, if the shell is not broken through, the life inside that egg dies and rots. We all have this shell of an ego, and then zazen breaks through that shell and gives birth to our true self.

So how does this shell break? If we live for small and selfish goals it won’t break. But if we live for all beings, it naturally breaks away because that is not ego. Of course everyone naturally wants to be awakened from the origin. We understand this, and we also understand how, at about twenty months of age, we begin thinking in terms of two, not one. Because of that, an ego comes forth and we use that ego to learn and evolve and make a life. But also because of that understanding of two, there is conflict. To liberate ourselves from this dualism we have to give birth to a new wisdom, and there is always friction in doing this. As long as we continue protecting our small self, we will never break through that shell. We have to decide to use the infinite great energy with which we are endowed from the origin in order to awaken and to awaken all beings. Not just humans, but all life energy. It’s all one life. When we are separate and isolated we feel powerless, but when we connect and unite and know our oneness directly we know how to go beyond that powerlessness and awaken all beings.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[22][Chapter 6]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
