---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: To enter the stage of the Tathagata in a single leap 
short_title: To enter the stage of the Tathagata in a single leap 
type: entry
weight: 123
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 23
---

### Sutra
Vimalakīrti said, “The bodhisattva who views [sentient beings] in this fashion should think to himself, ‘I should explain the Dharma for sentient beings in this fashion, and this will constitute true sympathy.

 “‘I should practice the sympathy of extinction, because of the absence of anything generated; “‘[I should] practice the sympathy of no-heat, because of the absence of the afﬂictions;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of sameness, because of the sameness of the three periods of time; “‘[I should] practice the sympathy of nondisputation, because of the absence of generation;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of nonduality, because of the nonconjunction of interior and exterior;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of nondestruction, because of the ultimate exhaustion [of the characteristics of sympathy];   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of resoluteness, because of indestructibility; practice the sympathy of purity, because of the essential purity of the dharmas;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of no extremes, because of its being like space; practice the sympathy of an arhat, because of the destruction of the “bandits” of the fetters;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of a bodhisattva, because of the paciﬁcation of sentient beings; practice the sympathy of a Tathāgata, because of attainment of the characteristic of “thusness”;  
‘[I should] practice the sympathy of a buddha, because of the enlightenment of sentient beings; practice the sympathy of the naturally [accomplished sage], because of the imperceptibility of causes;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of bodhi, because of the sameness of the single taste;  
 “‘[I should] practice the sympathy of inequivalence, because of the eradication of the affections;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of great compassion, because of guiding [sentient beings] by means of the Mahayana;  
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of nonrevulsion, because of the contemplation of emptiness and no-self;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of the charity of Dharma, because of the absence of regrets;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of morality, because of converting the transgressors; practice the sympathy of forbearance, because of protecting others and self;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of exertion, because of carrying the burden for sentient beings;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of concentration, because of not experiencing the ﬂavors [of desire];   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of wisdom, because of the absence of any time of non-understanding;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of skillful means, because of the manifestation of all [teaching methods];   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of non-hiding, because of the purity of sincerity;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of the profound mind, because of the absence of heterogeneous practices;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of the non-crazed, because of not using false conventions;   
“‘[I should] practice the sympathy of peace and joy, because of causing [beings] to attain the joy of buddhahood—thus is the sympathy of the bodhisattva.’”   

### Teisho

The Buddha’s compassion comes naturally because from the origin we are all compassionate, naturally wanting to give something. This is the truest compassion. It’s not about having some special idea or intention involved with that giving. This true compassion is something we all have. It resembles wanting to give something from an egoistic expectation and intention, and maybe this is not a bad thing, but to spontaneously give without any agenda is the natural compassion. They look similar but they are not the same; it is about whether the ego is involved or not involved. 

If a person is suffering, then we need to respond intuitively and directly to that suffering, and in that there is no past, present, and future. In this kind of deep compassion and love it’s not about time. And we don’t need to be accepted or thanked for our help. The bodhisattva is always in equilibrium, and there can be no conflict in our mind when we are manifesting and coming forth from true compassion. This is what Vimalakirti is saying.
{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[23][chapter 7]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
