---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Seek enlightenment and liberate sentient beings
short_title: Seek enlightenment and liberate sentient beings 
type: entry
weight: 124
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 24
---

### Sutra
7. At the time, there was a goddess in Vimalakīrti’s room who, upon seeing the great men listening to the Dharma being explained, made herself visible and scattered heavenly ﬂowers over the bodhisattvas and great disciples. When the ﬂowers reached the bodhisattvas they all immediately fell off, but when they reached the great disciples they adhered and did not fall off. Even using all their numinous powers, the disciples were unable to remove the ﬂowers.



 8. At that time, the goddess asked Śāriputra, “Why would you remove the ﬂowers?” 

[Śāriputra] answered, “These ﬂowers are contrary to the Dharma, so I would remove them.” 

The goddess said, “Do not say that these ﬂowers are contrary to the Dharma! Why? These ﬂowers are without discrimination. Sir, it is you who are generating discriminative thoughts. If one who has left home in the Buddha-Dharma has discrimination, this is contrary to the Dharma; if such a one is without discrimination, this is in accord with the Dharma.

 “Look at the bodhisattvas, to whom the ﬂowers do not adhere—this is because they have eradicated all discriminative thoughts. 

“For example, when a person is afraid, non-human [beings] are able to control him. Thus, since the disciples fear samsara, then forms, sounds, smells, tastes, and tangibles control you. None of the ﬁve desires can affect those who have transcended fear. 

“It is only because the latent inﬂuences [of your afﬂictions] are not yet exhausted that the ﬂowers stick to your bodies. “For those in whom the latent inﬂuences are exhausted, the ﬂowers do not stick.”



 9. Śāriputra said, “Have you stayed in this room long?” 

Answer: “I have stayed in this room as long as you have been emancipated.”

Śāriputra said, “How long have you stayed here?” 

The goddess said, “How long has it been since your emancipation?” 

Śāriputra was silent and did not answer. 

The goddess said, “What is your great wisdom that you remain silent?” 

Answer: “Emancipation is not to be spoken of, and so I did not know what to say.” 

The goddess said, “Speech and words are entirely the characteristics of emancipation. Why? 

“Emancipation is neither internal, nor external, nor intermediate. Words are also neither internal, nor external, nor intermediate. Therefore, Śāriputra, the explanation of emancipation does not transcend words. Why? 

“All dharmas have the characteristic of emancipation.” 

Śāriputra said, “Is it not also that emancipation is the transcendence of licentiousness, anger, and stupidity?”

 The goddess said, “On behalf of the self-conceited, the Buddha explained that emancipation is the transcendence of licentiousness, anger, and stupidity. If one is not self-conceited, the Buddha explains that licentiousness, anger, and stupidity are emancipation.” 

### Teisho
If you are awakened you can speak freely in order to bring this awakening to everyone. But this is what Sariputra is still caught on. We have to see what the Buddha has helped us to realize: that it is important for us not to stagnate in an initial understanding; instead we must continue in our state of awareness and deepen it. We don’t stop with knowing that we should not be caught on greed, anger, and delusion, but we live in such a way that we are not caught on them while seeing that within them there is also a way to further liberation. Don’t think about how you are awakened and become proud of that, but live from that awakened state in a way that others can learn from it. Vimalakirti is telling us that if you are still moved around by greed, anger and ignorance, or if you are still moved around by time, by space, and by acquiring, that is not true liberation. 

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[24][chapter 7]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
