---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Empty-handed, I hold a spade; walking, I ride an ox
short_title: Empty-handed, I hold a spade; walking, I ride an ox
type: entry
weight: 125
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 25
---
### Sutra  
1. Mañjuśrī then asked Vimalakīrti, “How should the bodhisattva penetrate the path of buddhahood?”   

Vimalakīrti said, “If a bodhisattva traverses the unacceptable paths, this is to penetrate the path of buddhahood.”  
 [Mañjuśrī] also asked, “How does the bodhisattva traverse the unacceptable paths?”  
 
 [Vimalakīrti] answered, “The bodhisattva practices the ﬁve [deeds of] interminable [retribution] without becoming distraught.   

“He goes to the hells without the deﬁlements of transgression; goes among the animals without the errors of ignorance, conceit, and so on.   

“He goes among the hungry ghosts replete in merit; traverses the paths of the form and formless realms without considering himself superior.  

 “He manifests acting out of desire but transcends the deﬁled attachments; manifests acting out of anger at sentient beings but is without aversion.   

“He manifests acting out of stupidity but uses wisdom to control his mind.   

“He manifests acting out of lust but forsakes both internal and external and does not begrudge his own life; manifests the practicing of moral infractions but peacefully resides in the pure precepts, even unto harboring great fear about even minor transgressions; manifests acting out of anger but is always sympathetically forbearant; manifests acting out of laziness, yet vigorously cultivates merit; manifests acting out of a disturbed mind, yet is always mindfully concentrated; manifests acting out of stupidity, yet penetrates both mundane and supramundane wisdom.   

“He manifests the practicing of ﬂattery and deception, yet uses good skillful means to accord with the meanings found in the sutras; manifests acting out of conceit, yet is like a bridge for sentient beings.  

“He manifests acting out of the afﬂictions, yet is always pure in mind; manifests becoming a Māra, yet accords with the wisdom of the Buddha and follows no other teaching; manifests becoming a śrāvaka, yet for sentient beings explains Dharmas they have not heard before; manifests becoming a pratyekabuddha, yet accomplishes great compassion to teach sentient beings; manifests becoming destitute, yet has the unlimited merit of the ‘hand of treasures’; manifests becoming maimed through criminal punishment, yet adorns himself with all the [thirty-two primary] characteristics and [eighty subsidiary] marks; manifests becoming low-born, yet is [actually] born within the Buddha’s lineage and replete in its various merits; manifests becoming feeble and ugly, yet attains the body of a Nārāyaṇa, which all sentient beings enjoy seeing.   

“He manifests becoming old and sick, yet always eradicates the roots of illness and transcends the fear of death.  

“He manifests having the material requisites, yet always views [the world as] impermanent and is truly without desire; manifests having wife, concubines, and mistresses, yet always distantly transcends the muddy ﬁlth of the ﬁve desires; manifests dumbness (i.e., muteness), yet accomplishes eloquence and unfailing dhāraṇīs.   

“He manifests becoming a ‘false ford’ (i.e., a heretic), yet uses the correct ford to ‘cross over’ sentient beings [to salvation].   

“He manifests entering all the destinies, yet eradicates their causes and conditions; and manifests nirvana, yet does not eradicate samsara.   

“Mañjuśrī, if a bodhisattva can traverse the unacceptable paths in this way, this is to penetrate the path of buddhahood.”   
  
### Teisho  
  
Vimalakirti here offers many, many versions of how to live in society without being moved around by the many things that can push and pull us. The examples are numberless, but what he is saying is this: the mind of this one moment has no clutter in it; do not become that state of mind where clutter gathers.   
Vimalakirti is telling us not to be caught on our conditioned ways of behaving, not to see our behavior in the usual context, and not to follow precepts in the usual way, but when we see those who are suffering in pain, experience that in an empathetic way. Instead of being caught on protecting and guarding our own small individual way of being, we must use our awareness for the larger picture, for dealing with all people’s suffering and liberation.  
{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[25][chapter 8]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
