---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Be thankful for kindness and show gratitude for virtue 
short_title: Be thankful for kindness and show gratitude for virtue 
type: entry
weight: 126
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 26
---

### Sutra
2. At this Vimalakīrti asked Mañjuśrī, “What is the seed of the Tathāgata?” 
Mañjuśrī said, “The possession of a body constitutes this seed. Ignorance and affection constitute this seed. Lust, anger, and stupidity constitute this seed. The four confusions constitute this seed. The ﬁve hindrances constitute this seed. The six entrances (āyatanas) constitute this seed. The seven loci of consciousness constitute this seed. The eight heterodox dharmas and nine loci of afﬂiction constitute this seed. The ten evil actions constitute this seed. In essence, the sixty-two mistaken views and all the afﬂictions constitute this seed.”

3. [Vimalakīrti] said, “Why is this?”   
[Mañjuśrī] answered, “Anyone who sees the unconditioned and enters the primary status [of Hinayana enlightenment] will be unable to generate the intention to achieve anuttarā samyak saṃbodhi.   
“It is just as lotus ﬂowers do not grow on dry land on the high plateau— these ﬂowers grow in the muddy ﬁlth of the lowly marshes. Thus one who sees the unconditioned dharmas and enters the primary status will never be able to generate the dharmas of a buddha. It is only within the mud of the afﬂictions that sentient beings give rise to the dharmas of a buddha.   
“Or again, it is like planting a seed in space, where it would never grow— only in nightsoil-enriched earth can it ﬂourish. In this way, one who enters the unconditioned primary status will not be able to generate the dharmas of a buddha.  
“It is only when one generates a view of self as great as Mount Sumeru that one is able to generate the intention to achieve anuttarā samyaksaṃbodhi and generate the dharmas of a buddha.   
“Therefore, you should understand that all the afﬂictions constitute the seed of the Tathāgata. It is like not being able to attain the priceless jewelpearl without entering the ocean. Therefore, if one does not enter the great sea of the afﬂictions, one will not be able to attain the jewel of omniscience.”

 ### Teisho
If we are born with all of our limbs but do not know gratitude for them, then there is nothing more debilitating than that. This is the same as being endowed with a splendid mind but never awakening to that Mind. Vimalakirti says this awakening cannot be done by trying to look good in some prescribed way. He is not saying to avoid doing good things, but to not try to look good as you do things, to not put on a show of doing such good things and performing important good deeds. Do not be deceived by the behavior of those who are thinking of themselves and trying to appear as good people. That is full of ego! Rather, offer everything by throwing yourself into society. This is how true liberation takes place. 

In this way Vimalakirti says that we cannot simply walk a conceptual path following in the footsteps of everyone else. We have to let go of everything to liberate all beings, or there will be no liberation. When our mind is not moved around at all, for the first time we can become one with the Buddha’s way. 

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[26][Chapter 8]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
