---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: No separation between stillness and motion 
short_title: No separation between stillness and motion
type: entry
weight: 127
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 27
---

### Sutra 
(7). At that time there was a bodhisattva in the assembly named Universally Manifests the Form Body. He asked Vimalakīrti, 
“O retired scholar, who are your parents, wife and sons, relatives, subordinates, servants, and friends? Where are your slaves, servants, elephants, horses, and vehicles?”   

At this, Vimalakīrti replied in verse:    

1. The perfection of wisdom is the bodhisattva’s mother; 
Skillful means is his father.   
ll the assembly of guides   
Without exception are the causes of his birth.   
2. Joy in the Dharma is his wife,   
And the mind of sympathy and compassion his daughters.   
The mind of goodness and sincerity is his sons,   
And ultimate emptiness and serenity his home.   

3. His congregation of disciples is the sensory troubles,   
Which he converts as he wishes.   
The factors of enlightenment are his good friends,   
On whom he depends to achieve correct enlightenment. 

4. The dharmas of the perfections are his companions,   
And the four types of attraction his dancing girls,   
Who sing the words of Dharma   
And thereby create their music.   

5. In the garden of dhāraṇī   
And the grove of the ﬂawless Dharma,   
Is the pure and wonderful ﬂower of the intention for enlightenment   
And the fruit of wisdom and emancipation.   
 
### Teisho

The poem that Vimalakirti now gives at the end of Chapter 8 is about the walking of the Buddha’s way. Up until this present time it has been said that if there is a fixed form, that is never the Buddha’s way. If the Buddha is something to be imagined, and Buddha’s way is a land or a form to be imagined, then this cannot be the Buddha world. Planting the seeds, Buddha seeds, in a world where we think we’re doing only good , that is missing the point.

A baby’s wisdom is prior to any mental understanding or any kind of mental version of dualism. At sixteen months, we for the fi rst time know that there is a me. And then at twenty-four months we know that this is divisible into two, a me and an other. And at thirty-six months we become dualistic in perceiving things. Initially, everything is perceived, and then we begin to judge and to evaluate. We don’t want to not benefi t in any situation. 
While our original mind is like this, it is also like a great round mirror mind, not narrow and limited. We are a moving life energy. We exist because of what that is. And that is what we are. Th is is the base of our whole wisdom, which is the true base of all people. And this is also referred to as prajna wisdom.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[27][chapter 8]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
