---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Body and mind are one
short_title: Body and mind are one
type: entry
weight: 128
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 28
---

### Sutra
1. At that time Vimalakīrti said to the congregation of bodhisattvas, “Sirs, how does the bodhisattva enter the Dharma gate of nonduality? Each of you explain this as you wish.”   
Within the assembly was a bodhisattva named Autonomous Dharma, who said, “Sirs, generation and extinction (i.e., samsara) constitute a duality. Since the dharmas were fundamentally not generated, now they are without extinction. To attain this [understanding is to achieve] forbearance of the nonarising of dharmas. This is to enter the Dharma gate of nonduality.” 

2. Maintenance of Virtue Bodhisattva said, “The self and the self’s attributes constitute a duality. It is because of the existence of the self that the self’s attributes occur. If the self does not exist, then there are no attributes of self. This is to enter the Dharma gate of nonduality.” 

### Teisho
As soon as Hojisai Bodhisattva finishes, then Tokushu Bodhisattva begins, “Because we hold onto having an ego, we develop an ego view.” For example, because of our body we need to have food, clothing, human communication, relationships, social communication— all our daily needs. An ego comes into being because we develop concerns and ideas about the needs of the body. Worrying about health concerns, such as the cold weather and our state of health. Th e ego displays itself through a bodily manifestation, as when we get angry our face becomes red. We have many ways of both exhibiting and examining ourself. 

If we pay attention to the truth, then we understand how it is prior to that ego view, and we are able to see in a way that is not moved around by that egoistic version of things. However, when we are feeling pain in our teeth, we notice it because our teeth hurt. When we’re feeling pain in our legs, we notice that we have legs because our legs hurt, but health is such that when our body is healthy we don’t notice that we have all these body parts.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[28][chapter 9]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
