---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Marvelous path of nonduality
short_title: Marvelous path of nonduality
type: entry
weight: 129
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 29
---

### Sutra
3. Unblinking Bodhisattva said, “Experience and nonexperience constitute a duality. If dharmas are not experienced, they cannot be attained (i.e., are imperceptible). Because of unattainability, there is no grasping, no forsaking, no production, and no activity. This is to enter the Dharma gate of nonduality.” 

4. Crown of Virtue Bodhisattva said, “Deﬁlement and purity constitute a duality. If one sees the real nature of deﬁlement, then there is no characteristic of purity, and one accords with the extinction of characteristics. This is to enter the Dharma gate of nonduality.” 

5. Excellent Constellation Bodhisattva said, “Motion and mindfulness constitute a duality. If there is motionlessness, there is no-mindfulness. If there is no-mindfulness, there is no discrimination. To penetrate this is to enter the Dharma gate of nonduality.” 

6. Excellent Eye Bodhisattva said, “The single characteristic and the non-characteristic constitute a duality. If one understands that the single characteristic is the non-characteristic, and does not grasp the non-characteristic but enters into universal sameness, this is to enter the Dharma gate of nonduality.” 

7. Wonderful Arm Bodhisattva said, “The aspirations of bodhisattvas and the aspirations of śrāvakas constitute a duality. If one contemplates that the characteristics of mind (i.e., mental aspirations) are empty, like phantasmagorical transformations, there is no aspiration of bodhisattvas and no aspiration of śrāvakas. This is to enter the Dharma gate of nonduality.”

8. Puṣya Bodhisattva said, “What is good and what is not good constitute a duality. If one does not generate the good and what is not good, entering into and penetrating the limit of the non-characteristics, this is to enter the Dharma gate of nonduality.”

### Teisho
Hosho Bodhisattva is talking about the good mind and the bad mind. We all have ideas about our behavior that sometimes it is good and sometimes it is bad. Th at conversation is never ending within each of us. It usually takes place in a moralistic framework, as a human being, as a citizen of a country and of the planet. We have to align within many challenging situations in order not to bring forth confusion. And that is why we have these inner dialogues. 

Each independent human being must consider these matt ers, and this is why it is an ongoing conversation. We are encountering these questions all the time. And also this is not simple because we have so much other thinking going on as well. Even though we make eff orts, it can so easily stay within a moralistic framework and not come into the clear, sublime truth of our deepest wisdom. For it to be able to do that we do zazen and enter this huge and all-embracing state of mind. 

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[29][chapter 9]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
