---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Vimalakirti’s single silence is like a hundred claps of thunder
short_title: Vimalakirti’s single silence is like a hundred claps of thunder
type: entry
weight: 130
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 30
---

### Sutra
32. After the various bodhisattvas had thus each made their explanations, [Vimalakīrti] asked Mañjuśrī, “How does the bodhisattva enter the Dharma gate of nonduality?”  
Mañjuśrī said, “As I understand it, it is to be without words and without explanation with regard to all the dharmas—without manifestation, without consciousness, and transcending all questions and answers. This is to enter the Dharma gate of non duality.” 
33. Mañjuśrī then asked Vimalakīrti, “We have each made our own explanations. Sir, you should explain how the bodhisattva enters the Dharma gate of nonduality.”   
At this point Vimalakīrti was silent, saying nothing.   
Mañjuśrī exclaimed, “Excellent, excellent! Not to even have words or speech is the true entrance into the Dharma gate of nonduality.” 

### Teisho
Here there is no use for syllables, sounds and ideas. Vimalakirti gave not one sound. And without adding a word or even half a word, he responds without responding. He said nothing at all.

Thirty-one bodhisattvas had told their experiences of it, and for us as well, telling experiences is not the Buddha Dharma and is not Zen. Each bodhisattva had told an experience, and there was no mistake in that experience itself. But in the very telling of it we separate from the experience itself. Manjusri also said that. But even saying that is extra. Vimalakirti, his was the telling by not telling of becoming of the Buddha’s very experience. 

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[30][chapter 9]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
