---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Storehouse of All Virtues Samadhi
short_title: Storehouse of All Virtues Samadhi
type: entry
weight: 131
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 31
---

### Sutra
14. Vimalakīrti then asked the bodhisattvas from the Host of Fragrances [world], “How does Accumulation of Fragrances Tathāgata explain the Dharma?” 
Those bodhisattvas said, “In our land the Tathāgata explains [the Dharma] without words. He simply uses the host of fragrances to make the gods and humans enter into the practice of the Vinaya. The bodhisattvas each sit beneath fragrant trees, smelling such wondrous fragrances, from which they attain the ‘samādhi of the repository of all virtues.’ Those who attain this samādhi all become replete in the merits of the bodhisattva.”

### Teisho
The Buddha there doesn’t teach with words. At the foot of a fragrant tree we sit. And with just that fragrance emanating from the tree, we are filled to overflowing with deep wisdom. This is a very high level of teaching. There is no verbal teachings. So what is it about it which is so splendid?  
 Is it the teaching that is so splendid?   
 Or is it that it is taught only by emanation?   
 Or is that fragrance that is so splendid?   
 Or is it the excellent of the wisdom of the students who are learning by just having a fragrance?   
 Or is it that one who smells are those the ones most wonderful?   
 This is definitely a very high level, a purified level of education. Therefore it does not need any complicated language or concepts. 

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[31][chapter 10]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
