---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Empty space preaches the Buddha dharma
short_title: Empty space preaches the Buddha dharma
type: entry
weight: 132
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 32
---

### Sutra
8. “There are buddha lands where the illumination of the Buddha performs the Buddha’s work, or where the bodhisattvas perform the Buddha’s work, or where conjured persons created by the Buddha perform the Buddha’s work, or where the bodhitree performs the Buddha’s work, or where the Buddha’s clothing and bedding perform the Buddha’s work, or where food performs the Buddha’s work, or where groves and pavilions perform the Buddha’s work, or where the thirty-two characteristics and eighty subsidiary marks perform the Buddha’s work, or where the Buddha’s body performs the Buddha’s work, or where space performs the Buddha’s work.  
Sentient beings respond to these conditions and are able to enter into the practice of the Vinaya. 

### Teisho

There are those who see the expansive lands of the world and can only think how narrow and tiny our own small desires and ideas when there is such a huge, magnanimous world. Thinking about how huge this galaxy is, makes us feel how small we are and much we have to make efforts in our life. 

If our mind is truly aligned, we wake up in the morning and we feel the deep intention to work energetically as hard as we can on whatever we are doing. If we get sick we can’t move, we constantly need help to do anything. See the huge gift of being healthy and being able to do everything for ourself and others in our life. 

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[32][chapter 11] 

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
