---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Neither exhaust the conditioned nor abide in the unconditioned
short_title: Neither exhaust the conditioned nor abide in the unconditioned
type: entry
weight: 133
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 33
---

### Sutra
16. The Buddha told the bodhisattvas, “You should learn the teaching of the emancipation of the exhaustible and inexhaustible. What is the exhaustible? 
“It is the conditioned dharmas. What is the inexhaustible? It is the unconditioned dharmas. If you are bodhisattvas, you should neither exhaust the conditioned nor abide in the unconditioned. 

17. “What is it not to exhaust the conditioned? It is neither to transcend great sympathy nor to forsake great compassion, to profoundly generate the aspiration to achieve omniscience and never forget it even momentarily. It is to teach sentient beings without ever becoming tired, to be constantly mindful of following the teaching of the four attractions. It is to defend the correct Dharma without fear for one’s own life, to plant good roots without becoming fatigued. It is for one’s intent to always be on peaceful abiding and one’s skillful means rededicated [to anuttarā samyaksaṃbodhi]. It is to seek the Dharma without tiring and explain the Dharma without parsimony, and to energetically make offerings to the buddhas. 

### Teisho
Each and every one of us is a form that will die and change. And each person has ego. In this ego and this body have greed and anger and ignorance. And when we go all of it will be gone as well. Holding on to any of it has no purpose. Bodhisattvas who care for this world, do not take any aspects personally. 
In general, people in society, work for their own satisfaction whereas bodhisattvas make use of everything for the awakening of all beings. At every step, we must throw everything away, seeing that the compounded is not different from the uncompounded. By deeply caring for all beings, we will not be toppled over by our ideals and can transform even our complaining into wisdom. 

And how do we liberate this world of the compounded when we are full of difficulties and differences, knowing that the world is full of delusion and phenomena? If we try to do this mentally, it won’t work, but when we raise the vow to achieve liberation by caring deeply for every being’s deep mind will this world be seen clearly and given liberation. Wisdom is not dualistic. Our liberated character has no fixed form.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[33][chapter 11]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
