---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Regard the realm of birth and death as though it were a garden
short_title: Regard the realm of birth and death as though it were a garden
type: entry
weight: 134
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 34
---

### Sutra
“By doing so one will enter samsara without fear, be without sad ness or joy regarding the various honors and disgraces, not belittle the unlearned and revere the learned as if they are buddhas, cause those who have fallen into the afﬂictions to generate correct mindfulness, distantly transcend pleasure and not consider it valuable, not be attached to one’s own pleasure yet celebrate the pleasure of others, have the concept that being in the dhyānas is like being in a garden or pavilion. 

“One will have the concept that seeing one coming to make a request is like [seeing] an excellent teacher, have the concept that to forsake one’s various possessions is to be replete in omniscience, have the concept that to see transgressors is to generate salviﬁc protection, have the concept of the pāramitās (perfections) being one’s parents, and have the concept of the [thirty-seven] factors of enlightenment being one’s subordinates. One’s generation of practices and [planting of] good roots will be limitless. One will create one’s own buddha land with the various ornamentations of the pure countries [of different buddhas]. 

### Teisho
The point is not to just to hear the words, the words are guides directing us to the living truth. In this way, in the Dhammapada, the Buddha teaches, “How rare it is in this world of life and death to be alive. How rare it is to be able in this world to hear the Dharma. How rare it is in this world to be able to practice the truth of this Dharma. And how rare it is in this world to be able to meet a true teacher.” 

Our life is very full of ups and downs. We succeed. We fail. We succeed. We fail. We get sad and miserable, but even then when we are so sad and miserable that we don’t want to live, remember the bodhisattvas. The bodhisattvas know that things cycle, that is never all only darkness. Even if we don’t know what will come be unmoved around by whatever arises. As when we’re sitting on a solid seat on a moving train, we watch the scenery go by in peace. But if our seat was poorly attached to the floor and shook about, we couldn’t experience that peace. 

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[34][chapter 11]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
