---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: The teaching of the exhaustible and the inexhaustible liberation
short_title: The teaching of the exhaustible and the inexhaustible liberation
type: entry
weight: 135
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 35
---

### Sutra
19. “Furthermore, in order to be complete in merit one should not abide in the unconditioned; and in order to be complete in wisdom one should not exhaust the conditioned. 

“In order to [achieve] great sympathy and compassion, one should not abide in the unconditioned; in order to fulﬁll one’s original vow, one should not exhaust the conditioned.  
In order to accumulate the medicines of the Dharma, one should not abide in the unconditioned;   
in order to bestow medicines according [to the needs of sentient beings], one should not exhaust the conditioned.   
In order to understand the illnesses of sentient beings, one should not abide in the unconditioned;   
in order to extinguish the illnesses of sentient beings, one should not exhaust the conditioned. 
 
 O good sirs, a bodhisattva who cultivates this Dharma does not either exhaust the conditioned or abide in the unconditioned. This is called ‘the teaching of the emancipation of the exhaustible and inexhaustible.’ You should learn this.” 

### Teisho

See that all views are in fact borrowed and do not be attached to them and concerned about results. Don’t be caught melancholy but see that mind that has no form and no substance. Develop this empty mind to bring forth wisdom and give joy to each and every person. Forget oneself and offer everything to others. 

Never stop these efforts to do zazen and to train, along with everyone else in society. As Vimalakirti teaches the central theme of the sutra, “The world is sick and therefore I am sick.” Sentient beings are numberless, never stop helping others with our greatest caring wisdom. This is Vimalakirti’s great gift of energy, use it and vow to bring everyone true peace and wisdom. Becoming and realizing this wisdom and energy ourselves so that we can bring it to all people.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[35][chapter 11]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
