---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Recognize the unconditioned nature of all existence
short_title: Recognize the unconditioned nature of all existence
type: entry
weight: 136
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 36
---

### Sutra
1. At this point the World-honored One asked Vimalakīrti, “When you wish to see the Tathāgata, in what ways do you view the Tathāgata?” 
Vimalakīrti said, “As if contemplating the real characteristic of my own body—so do I view the Buddha. 

“When I view the Tathāgata, he does not come in the past, does not go in the future, and does not abide in the present. 

“I neither view him as form, nor view him as the suchness of form, nor view him as the nature of form. I neither view him as feeling, conception, process, or consciousness; nor view him as the suchness of consciousness; nor view him as the nature of consciousness. 

“He does not arise from the four great elements and is identical to space. He has no accumulation of the six sensory capacities, and his eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind have already passed beyond and are not within the triple world. 

“Having transcended the three deﬁlements, he is in accord with the three emancipations. Complete in the three illuminations, he is equivalent to ignorance. 

“He is neither the single characteristic nor different characteristics. He is neither a self-characteristic nor an other-characteristic. He is neither without characteristics, nor does he grasp characteristics. 

“He is not of this shore, nor of the other shore, nor of the current [of samsara] in between, yet he converts sentient beings. I view him in extinction, yet he is not permanently in extinction. He is neither this nor that, and he neither uses this nor uses that. 

“He cannot be understood with wisdom, nor can he be known by consciousness. He is without darkness (i.e., ignorance), without brightness (i.e., understanding), without name, and without characteristic. He is without strength, without weakness, and neither pure nor deﬁled. He does not occupy a region, nor does he transcend the regions.

 “He is neither conditioned nor unconditioned. He is without manifesting and without explaining. 

“He is neither charitable nor stingy, neither observant nor transgressive [of the precepts], neither forbearant nor angry, neither energetic nor lazy, neither composed nor perturbed, and neither wise nor foolish. He is neither sincere nor dissembling, neither coming nor going, neither exiting nor entering. All the paths of words are eliminated.

 “He is neither a ﬁeld of blessings nor not a ﬁeld of blessings. He is neither one worthy of offerings (i.e., arhat) nor not one worthy of offerings. 

“He neither grasps nor forsakes; he neither has characteristics nor is without characteristics. 

“He is identical to the true limit and equivalent to the Dharma-nature. 

“He is indescribable, incalculable; he transcends appellations and measures. He is neither great nor small. 

“He is neither vision, nor hearing, nor perceiving, nor knowing; he transcends the host of fetters. He is equivalent to the various types of wisdom and identical to sentient beings. He is without discrimination with regard to the dharmas. 

“He is entirely without failing, without impurity, without vexation, without intentionality (lit., “unconstructed”), without activation, without generation, and without extinction; without fear, without sorrow, without joy, without dislike, and without attachment; without past, without future, and without present. He cannot be discriminated or manifested using any verbal explanations at all. 

“World-honored One, such is the body of the Tathāgata, and thus do I perform its contemplation. To use this contemplation is called the correct contemplation. If [one uses some] other contemplation, this is called the incorrect contemplation.”

### Teisho
The bodhisattvas that accompanied Vimalakirti wanted to know what makes a Buddha. Gautama Siddhartha awakened to the truth under the Bodhi tree. For 21 days he deepened his awakening and then he considered how to share the truth of what he had realized. So he went to Sarnath where his friends with whom he had trained in austerities were staying. He taught, guided and awakened all of them. 

At that time there was only the dharma and this small sangha, nothing called Buddha yet. Buddha means this historic person, and it also means something different that goes beyond history. The Dharma is the Buddha, not just a person at some point in history, but the Dharma is the Buddha.
When Ananda asked when the Buddha was about to die, now what were they to do? The Buddha said, “Do not seek refuge externally. Seek refuge within. Do not seek refuge in external things. Take refuge only in the Dharma”. When the dharma is clear to us, everything is clear and right, to see the dharma allows us to resolve everything and to see how to be.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[36][chapter 12]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
