---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: The realm of life and death, just as it is, is nirvana
short_title: The realm of life and death, just as it is, is nirvana
type: entry
weight: 137
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 37
---

### Sutra
2. Śāriputra then asked Vimalakīrti, “Where did you die to become born here?”

Vimalakīrti said, “Are there death and birth in the dharmas as you apprehend (lit., “attain”) them?” 

Śāriputra said, “There are no death and birth [in the dharmas].”

 [Vimalakīrti said,] “If the dharmas are without the characteristics of death and birth, why do you ask ‘Where did you die to become born here?’ What do you mean? It is as if a magician conjures up a man and a woman— do they die and become born?” 

Śāriputra said, “They do not die and become born.” 

[Vimalakīrti said,] “But can you not have heard the Buddha explain that the dharmas are like conjured characteristics?” 

[Śāriputra said,] “So I have.” 

[Vimalakīrti said,] “If all the dharmas are like conjured characteristics, why do you ask ‘Where did you die to become born here?’ Śāriputra, death is the characteristic of the destruction of false dharmas, and birth is the characteristic of continuity of false dharmas. Although bodhisattvas die, they do not exhaust their roots of goodness, and although they are born they do not nurture the various evils.” 

### Teisho

All of the disciples of the Buddha, the great disciples, all of their wisdom together would have been only one sixteenth of the wisdom, of the great wisdom of Sariputra. And yet in this sutra he is often turned into the bad guy. Here, he is asking slightly flatteringly, in what world had Vimalakirti lived before, what great world, because his wisdom was so great and it continues. 

When we see a movie we are only seeing it as real while we watch it. When it is over we don’t think the things in the movie are continuing going on and are real and actual somewhere. And this is the same with everything in our environment and with our bodies as well. But instead of seeing this clearly as it really is, we put down that person, we get bothered by this person, we can’t stand having to see this person. Yet while we know all of it is phenomena we also still have to hold each person and meeting precious and know that it is a rare occasion. 

On knowing that, this is all phenomena at the same thing, at the same time, not thinking that each and everything is worthless because it’s phenomena. Not holding on to attached feelings about this phenomena either. But that would be the same as being attached to things in a movie. In a movie, many scenes happen but nobody in the movie is really dying. They just got shot. And this is how it has to be seen. To not become attached to it is wisdom.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[37][chapter 12]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
