---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Accept the teaching  joyfully and put it into practice
short_title: Accept the teaching  joyfully and put it into practice
type: entry
weight: 138
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 38
---

### Sutra
9. “Those who get hold of this sutra will attain the [entire] storehouse (i.e., treasury) of the Dharma jewel. 
“If one reads, recites, explains its meaning, or practices according to its explanation, one will be protected and remembered by the buddhas. To make offerings to such a person—understand that this is to make offerings to the Buddha. To copy and maintain these fascicles of scripture—understand that the Tathāgata is present in that room. Those who hear this sutra and are able to become joyful accordingly will achieve omniscience. If one is able to devoutly understand this sutra, even just a single four-phrase verse (gāthā), and explain it to others—understand that such people will immediately receive a prediction of [their future achievement of] anuttarā samyaksaṃbodhi.” 

### Teisho
A central issue of this sutra is taught by Vimalakirti when visited on his sick bed and asked what he was going through, he said, “I am not sick but I am sick because society is sick so I have become sick. I will only recover when society recovers.” Without this understanding this interpenetration, we cannot work in the world. It’s not about teaching a doctrine of Buddhism to people, rather to help them see how we have lost touch with our innate nature. Help people in the world directly perceive their sickness and help people see their deep wisdom with clarity. Directly realizing the dharma in this moment is the way of the truth. 
The Vimalakirti Sutra is not given to us so we can spend our time on interpretations but to guide us in how to live. In this world we make continuous efforts to bring an end to all suffering of all beings. This is the greatest offering to the Buddha, these are the Four Immeasurable Treasures. Keep this sutra close, readily at hand, use it, and the Buddha will be living in the same room. 
Someone who can feel this sutra deeply can open their path widely and be at one with all society, becoming like a mirror simply reflecting exactly what comes in front of us. Not moved around by the constantly changing reflections, being joyful or sad with others, yet not drowning in sentiments and opinions. If we realize this path taught in the Vimalakirti sutra, if we realize this Samadhi offered by Vimalakirti, then the way to liberate others will manifest spontaneously. 

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[38][chapter 12]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
