---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Purity is the Buddha dharma
short_title: Purity is the Buddha dharma
type: entry
weight: 139
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 39
---

### Sutra
14. [The Buddha told the] heavenly emperor, “Prince Moon Canopy then saw the purity of the Dharma. Hearing the Buddha bestow a prediction [of future buddhahood] on him, he developed faith and left home. After cultivating the good Dharma with exertion for not very long, he attained the ﬁve numinous penetrations and became a bodhisattva. He attained dhāraṇī and unending eloquence. After the nirvana of that buddha, using the power of the numinous penetrations, dhāraṇī,and eloquence that he had attained, he disseminated the wheel of the Dharma that Medicine King Buddha had turned for a full ten short kalpas. Through his diligent practice and exertion in defending the Dharma, in that lifetime Moon Canopy bhikṣu converted a million koṭis of people, who became irreversible in their [quest for] anuttarā samyak saṃbodhi.Fourteen nayutas of people generated the profound inspiration to become śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas. Immeasurable sentient beings gained birth in the heavens. 

### Teisho
When we get old we have to look at our state of mind just as it is, seeing that there is no devil making us behave badly. Rather there is a mind’s light that is shining through even in what appears to be darkness. Not being upset when we go into the kitchen and we forget why did we go in there. What were we going in there for anyway? Hold onto our strong motivation and don’t keep saying how very old we are. Work with these things creatively and use with our natural wisdom, then it is the same as not getting caught on our narrowminded anger and hostilities. At every possible opportunity decrease the anger and live in a way that is positive. This too is our Dharma-worship.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[39][Chapter 13]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
