---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Playing freely in the spiritual powers
short_title: Playing freely in the spiritual powers
type: entry
weight: 104
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 4
---

### Sutra
At that time there was within the great city of Vaiśālī an elder named Vimalakīrti. He had already made offerings to immeasurable buddhas, deeply planting the foundation of goodness. He had attained forbearance of the nonarising [of dharmas], and his eloquence was unhindered. He disported in the numinous penetrations and had achieved all the dhāraṇīs. He had attained fearlessness and had subjugated the troubling vengeance of the Māras. Entering into [all the] gates of profound Dharma, he was excellent at the perfection of wisdom. Having penetrated skillful means, his great vows had been accomplished.

Understanding the tendencies of the minds of sentient beings, he was also able to discriminate between those of sharp and dull faculties. Long [a practitioner of] the path of buddhahood, his mind was already pure, and he was deﬁnitively [dedicated to] the Mahayana. He considered well the activities of the realms of existence, and, residing in the deportment of the Buddha, his mind was great as the ocean. The buddhas praised him [as their] disciple, and the Indras, Brahmās, and world lords (i.e., heavenly kings) revered him.

Wanting to save people, [Vimalakīrti] used his excellent skillful means to reside in Vaiśālī, where with wealth immeasurable he attracted the poor, with the purity of his morality he attracted the miscreants, with the moderation of his forbearance he attracted the angry, with great exertion he attracted the indolent, with singleminded concentration he attracted the perturbed, and with deﬁnitive wisdom he attracted the foolish.

Although he was a white-robed [layman], he maintained the pure Vinaya conduct of a śramaṇa; although he resided in the home, he was not attached to the triple world. He manifested the existence of wife and sons, but always cultivated chastity. He revealed the existence of subordinates, but always enjoyed transcendence. Although his clothing was richly decorated, it was with the marks and features [of a Tathāgata] that he adorned his body. Although he drank and ate, the joy of concentration was his [favorite] ﬂavor. If he went to gambling houses or theaters it was only to save people. He hosted those of the heretic paths without breaking his correct faith. Although he illuminated the profane classics he always took pleasure in the Buddha-Dharma. He was revered by all as the one most worthy of offerings.

### Teisho
When we only do what we think benefits or profits us, we seldom use our huge potential or access our deep character. That which we don’t like, we don’t feel like doing. If we become too full of delusions, we can clear those away by doing the deep breathing of susokkan. Instead of becoming so irritable and so aggravated, we do our breathing, extending each exhalation. We expand widely—and we are able to reach a place where we become quiet. Realizing how this works, we do it some more, and clarify further, knowing a greater breath and a greater depth of Mind. 

We are always wanting to control others; this is an expression of one kind of fear. We have to liberate ourselves from this fear. If we align our state of mind, that fear naturally goes away and new wisdom can then come forth. We have all kinds of fantasies and ideas that obstruct us—to let go of all of those is what Vimalakirti knew how to do. 

He had a deep wisdom that was free from any small-self filter. He could see the best way to be. After we align our awareness—we do susokkan deeply and go to where there is nothing left to be caught on, for everything is all wide open—we become this openness and then we can receive everything. We know from deep within the four Bodhisattva Vows that sentient beings are numberless, and yet no matter how impossibly difficult it is to liberate so many, we vow we will do that impossible thing.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[4][chapter 2]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
