---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Liberation beyond all comprehension
short_title: Liberation beyond all comprehension
type: entry
weight: 140
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 40
---

### Sutra
 Buddha, “We too, after the Buddha’s nirvana, will extensively disseminate
6. At this all the bodhisattvas held their palms together and addressed the Buddha, “We too, after the Buddha’s nirvana, will extensively disseminate the Dharma of anuttarā samyaksaṃbodhi throughout the countries of the ten directions. We will also guide those who explain the Dharma and cause them to obtain this sutra.” 
7. Then the four heavenly kings addressed the Buddha, “World-honored One, in every place, whether city, village, mountain forest, or wilderness, where there are those who read and recite and explain these fascicles of scripture, we will lead our palace retainers in proceeding to those places, to listen to the Dharma and protect those people. For an area of a hundredyojanas we will make it convenient [to hear their explanations] without seeking.” 
8. At this point the Buddha said to Ānanda, “Accept and maintain this sutra, and disseminate it extensively.” 
Ānanda said, “Assuredly. I have already accepted and maintained its essentials. World-honored One, what is the name of this sutra?” 
The Buddha said, “Ānanda, this sutra is named the ‘Discourse of Vimalakīrti.’ It is also called the ‘Dharma Gate of the Inconceivable Emancipation.’ As such you should accept and maintain it.” 
When the Buddha ﬁnished explaining this sutra, the Elder Vimala kīrti, Mañjuśrī, Śāriputra, Ānanda, and all the great congregations of gods, humans, and asuras, hearing what the Buddha had explained, rejoiced greatly. 
### Teisho
In this way the Buddha ended and all of the disciples with great gratitude and bowed and vowed to protect this teaching. That is what is external, and what is externally learned is only knowledge, not wisdom. We can only know wisdom from the mind within, like a mirror that sees every single thing exactly as it is. We have to know this from deep inside. It cannot be learned only by something that is mental. We have to see it and see it beyond any discrimination, to pierce through it and to see it precisely. 
Until then we must realize this, believe in it and not be fooled by the phenomena that pass by during that time. Not being moved around at all by anything. Here we can see the truth of the Dharma, to know it irrevocably and deeply experience it. Through that experience seeing how there is nothing, nothing at all separating between self and other, self and universe.
{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[40][chapter 14]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
