---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Harmony, respect, purity, tranquillity
short_title: Harmony, respect, purity, tranquillity
type: entry
weight: 144
class: side-by-side
abstract:
object:
  - id: 44
---
### Sutra

### Teisho
These words are used in Zen but especially they are used in reference to the tea ceremony. They are in fact words spoken by the head tea master, Murata Jiko, when the Shogun Ashikaga Yoshimasa asked him, "What is the mind of tea."

Murata Jiko answered succinctly, "Harmony, respect, purity, tranquillity." Since then, these words have been thought of in conjunction with tea.

No matter what else might be said about the world of human relationships, it needs to be peaceful and tranquil. When it is not, people are unstable and insecure. But what is this peace?

The first part of the kanji for peace looks like a mouth surrounded by many things to eat. Kanji is truly thorough! Even a baby is happiest and will stop crying when it can put its mouth to a breast. Any group having a meeting will do better with something to eat and drink. For any gathering to go well, we need something there to put in our mouths.

The second half of the kanji for peace looks flat and balanced. It is because things are not flat and balanced that the world descends into confusion. Some people have too much, while others don't have enough. This disparity is what causes conflict. We can't look at this only conceptually. If all 6.3 billion people actually had equal amounts to eat, they could be peaceful and harmonious. It is our responsibility to see that that happens. Yet just saying peace, peace, peace and trying to help by holding meetings is not sufficient. Harmony also requires respect for each person's deepest character. Then we are like friends, intimate not just in form but with each other's deep character. This is the level on which we must be intimate. Regardless of our class or caste or culture or language, we're all humans, and we have to respect each other's deepest character, or it won't work.

We have to feel this respect not just because we are told to but because we have a clear mind to respect with. Otherwise it is only a ritual. If our mind is not truly balanced, we can't respect others in a balanced way. That clear mind also has to receive what all people have to say, in all kinds of situations, or the things we encounter will confuse and twist us and make us unstable and insecure. No matter what comes to us from the outside, we must have an essence that is not moved around by anything. If we are not as peaceful as the bottom of the ocean, it is not true peace. That is why we need "Harmony, respect, purity, tranquillity."

These words and ideas have been used for many centuries, teaching that in our human relationships, we find peace by respecting each other's deepest character. In the Lotus Sutra there is the story of Jo Fukyo Bodhisattva, who did not recite sutras or sit zazen but prostrated to everyone he encountered, saying he had deep respect for them and they would become a Buddha. He prayed to each person, but those who were prayed to didn't think they were so worthy of respect. Because they disliked themselves, they would get angry and spit at him and hit him and yell at him. But he would simply reply, "I have a deep respect for you; I see in you the deep Mind of Buddha." This Jo Fukyo Bodhisattva was one of the Buddha's past lives.

It is said that any religion that isn't like this won't last. Religion can't be just a matter of praying to a God. We must find and awaken to our deep godlike potential. This must be realized deeply and then polished and respected in each other.

#### Tea House
The empty room of Vimalakirti where Manjusri comes to inquire of Vimalakirti's illness is said to be the source of the tea house, tea ceremony and the tea garden. This way of tea ceremony, with its spare hermitage-like tea room and simple garden was begun by Tea Master Rikyu. He did long years of practice and zazen and from his deep power of vow he taught that the first priority in the training of tea is to intimately study the Dharma. He taught this himself and he was always creating a context of how it is in the zendo, and also that the tea garden should maintain the simplicity of a Zen temple garden.

This is Rikyu’s own way of teaching, and it was this very hut of Vimalakirti which was the model for Rikyu’s teahouse. When Vimalakirti took everything out of his house, leaving only one bed where he lay, this way of being is a way of expressing one’s own life. The tearoom is usually the size of four and one half tatami mats and outside of the tea room there is a small simple garden. The four and one half mat room is the size taken from the Vimalakirti Sutra; the small simple garden comes from the teaching in the Lotus sutra. The room in which Vimalakirti lived was a square, four and one half tatami sized room, and this is the same as the word for a head priest of a temple. It is a little larger than nine feet square, with the addition of the tokonoma and a wooden board; this is just the size of four and one half tatami mats.

One Buddha land. Buddha lands are not about space, but about being one complete world, three meters square. In the case of the tea room, we purify our senses before entering it, rinse our mouths, and put away our worldly thoughts and ideas. We enter the room with  a quiet focused minds. Usually, about three or four people can fit into a tea room comfortably. But if there are no mental, dualistic ideas to restrict and make it narrow, it is not difficult for a three meter square tea room to hold eight thousand bodhisattvas, five hundred disciples, and one hundred thousand gods and goddesses. We can all enter if we think about it. Rationally it may seem impossible. But since it is the whole great space in that room, it is an infinite size.

At the doorway to the tea ceremony room a fan is placed on the tatami, marking a definite entrance. Then we go to the tokonoma, the place where even in a regular house we find a space for our mind to become settled. Our house is a place to rest our tired body, but it also has to be a place to find peace and a settled mind. The One Drop Zendos’ are also places where we can respect each other and find peace. The tokonoma was originally a Buddha altar, and that is why incense is offered to the Buddha's words that hang there, and light is provided to light those words and our travel. To the right is a candle, to the left is water, and in the middle is an incense burner.

Hung in the middle of the tokonoma are the Buddha's or Patriarchs' phrases. They always hang there, providing a place of refuge for our mind. The words are a resting place, a staff for our mind, so we can sit down silently. In the tea room the tokonoma is for bowing to and honoring, not as a matter of form but from the true depths of our mind. If we always do that with respect for all people who share this same deep mind, we will all be awakened to that.

Then we look at each tea utensil very seriously, examining it and seeing the value in each one. The beauty and the flavor of each has to be looked at carefully to see its highest quality. We can't just look vaguely, there is no exchange of mind in that. A scholar of justice once said to his students, "Do you know that justice and law are the most feared subjects? But they are only about respecting society and the people in it, not about studying punishment. You have to see all things clearly before you start this study. Go and see things that were used as tools before the time of Christ, look at things in the museums and how they were used. You have to learn how to see things deeply. If you can't pray for the best for society, you can't understand justice. We have to study all things and see them well to know what will be useful and best for each person."

We look carefully at each individual tea bowl. We touch the life energy of one flower in a vase. We smell the incense and feel the warmth of the water, and there our very mind's depth is warmed as well. Not as things but as real live people we greet these utensils, and our deep respect grows and is cultivated.

As we give our mind to each and every thing, we know the source of peace and harmony. It is not only about respecting people and character, but so often we can't even do that. We are always judging the ways of others or their past deeds or their bad habits. We are always looking at their weaknesses. But if we do that we can't truthfully respect them. As Jo Fukyo Bodhisattva did, we have to let go of all ideas of good and bad before we can truly respect someone, and we can't enter the tea room sincerely unless we are peaceful in our own mind. We must have a mind like a mirror that simply reflects and does not judge. Then we can see in the same way as God, who gives rain equally to good people and bad, and realize that we have that very same mind inside us.

Vimalakirti is the one who gave birth to the tea room garden, a small garden outside the tea room that is like the one written about in the Vimalakirti Sutra. Vimalakirti's room is called a hojo. It is the size of four and one half tatami mats, just big enough for a human to live in the least possible space. Vimalakirti was sick in such a room when Manjusri came to visit with many Bodhisattvas, but there was nothing at all in the room. Vimalakirti was just burning incense and waiting. In the tea ceremony as well, nothing extra is added. There is only the fragrance of incense and flowers; everything else is empty. Thus is the empty mind of the tea master expressed. The guests purify themselves by washing their hands at the rock basin and then enter with a purified mind.

Japanese used to go to nature in the mountains repeating, "Six Senses Purified, Six Senses Purified." All of the senses and the whole body become pure when we climb a mountain. We see the mountain, and our eyes are purified. Hearing the birds, our ears are purified. We drink the clear river's water, and our mouth is purified. We sweat, and our body is purified. We climb the mountain and think nothing at all, and our mind is purified. In this way, we make all of our senses pure. This is the purity of "Harmony, respect, purity, tranquillity."

Here is where the ideas and doctrines of all religions return to the pure source of true religion. For all religions this idea of purity is important, or it is not true religion.

Yet we also have so much past experience and knowledge. As Bankei Zenji has said it, "That old barrel--if we burst the bottom out we have three barrel staves and one empty circle or enso." We are so full of emotions and past experiences and ideas that are so interesting, or so frustrating. Those ideas are fine when they arise, but if we keep piling them up our mind becomes like a tank filled with methane gas. We must not let that make us dark and heavy. That ego sludge at the barrel's bottom has to be burst through. All the sides then fall away, and there is only that circle of the bottom of the barrel. One circle, our true pure clear mind, the mind of God, humans' original mind, which is empty like a mirror, pure and clear.

We have added things to that original mind and lost sight of its clarity. If religion is necessary at all, it is to let go of what we have become stuck on and awaken to our original mind. For doing just this we have zazen. When we let go of everything we have accumulated, we can see directly what is actually there. Then we can use our experiences and knowledge without mistake, for all beings and for all of society. For this we have to purify that mind, this clear "Harmony, respect, purity, tranquillity."

As the Buddha said, we have to extinguish the flames of greed, extinguish the flames of ignorance, and extinguish the flames of anger, and then we will know nirvana's tranquillity. If we realize the true source of our mind, we know this pure and clear place, and from there we respect all beings. This is the source of peace for the whole world.

"Harmony, respect, purity, tranquillity."

Not just for tea ceremony, but as the source of peace for all humankind.

["Vimalakirti meets Manjusri in his 'tea room' "](/chptr5/)

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

{{< /q-class >}}
