---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Mind in perfect tranquility
short_title: Mind in perfect tranquility
type: entry
weight: 105
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 5
---

### Sutra 

	In supporting the correct Dharma he attracted both old and young. In all of his business dealings, although he made worldly proﬁts he never took joy in them. In wandering the crossroads, he dispensed beneﬁt to sentient beings. In entering into government administration, he safeguarded everyone. In entering into the lecture halls, he led people by means of the Mahayana. In entering the schools, he inspired the children. In entering the brothels, he revealed the transgressions [that arise from] desire. In entering the wine shops, he was able to maintain (lit., “establish”) his [good] intention.  
	When he was with the elders, as the most honored of the eminent he explained the excellent Dharma for them.   
	When he was among retired scholars as the most honored of the retired scholars he eradicated their attachments.   
	When he was among kṣatriyas, as the most honored among kṣatriyas he taught them forbearance.   
	When he was among brahmans, as the most honored among brahmans he eliminated their arrogance.   
	When he was among the ministers, as the most honored among ministers he taught them the correct Dharma.   
	When he was among princes, as the most honored among princes he instructed them with loyalty and ﬁliality.   
	When he was among palace ofﬁcials, as the most honored among palace ofﬁcials he converted the palace women.  
	When he was among the common people, as the most honored among the common people he had them generate the power of blessings.   
	When he was among Brahmā gods, as the most honored of the Brahmā gods he taught with superior wisdom.   
	When he was among Indras, as the most honored among Indras he manifested impermanence.   
	When he was among world-protector [gods], as the most honored among world-protectors he protected sentient beings.   
	The Elder Vimalakīrti used immeasurable skillful means such as these to beneﬁt sentient beings.  

### Teisho

Although the layman Vimalakirti lived within the world of form, he knew well the world beyond form and beyond life and death—the world of not being caught on the material or even the nonmaterial. He knew that excellent creations are not all there is to life. Beyond delusion there is deep Mind, which unites all of us through every era. He saw this clearly and knew that this world is the source of the whole great universe. We have to see this and return to this place, and for doing this we have zazen.

In order to see this—that there is nothing in existence that is of a fixed, permanent form and that all things are phenomena—we have to first recognize that everything around us is always changing and then realize deeply and clearly what does not change. We do zazen in order to do that. We put aside the things that are moving so quickly in society, and we are able to better realize that place which is slightly different, which isn’t always only involved in that ongoing change.

With Vimalakirti’s teaching, we see how to go about helping humans realize that pure mind. To not be thinking that we are superior, or even worse, to attack ourselves for being insufficient: this is the important wisdom that we learn from Vimalakirti.

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[5][chapter 2]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
