---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Let us reflect deeply on our true efforts and the efforts of those who brought us this food
short_title: Let us reflect deeply 
type: entry
weight: 106
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 6
---

### Sutra 

10. The Buddha told Mahākāśyapa, “You go inquire about Vimalakīrti’s illness.” 
Kāśyapa addressed the Buddha, “World-honored One, I dare not accept your instruction to go inquire about his illness. Why? I remember once in the past, when I was begging in a poor neighborhood, Vimalakīrti came and said to me, “‘Kāśyapa, while abiding in the Dharma of universal sameness, you should proceed in sequence in your begging.   
“‘It is because of not eating that you should practice begging.   
“‘It is because of the destruction of one’s physical integrity that you should take that lump of food. It is because of not receiving that you should receive that food.   
“‘You should enter a village with the idea that it is an empty aggregation  
 “‘The forms you see are equivalent to [what] the blind [see]; the sounds you hear are equivalent to echoes; the fragrances you smell are equivalent to the wind; the ﬂavors you eat should not be discriminated; your tactile sensations are like the realizations of wisdom; and you should understand that the dharmas are like phantasms. That which is without self-nature and without other-nature originally was not burning and will not become extinguished now.  
 “‘Kāśyapa, if you are able to enter the eight emancipations without renouncing the eight perversions, using the characteristic of perversion to enter into the correct Dharma, and using a single meal to give to all, making offerings to the buddhas and the assembly of worthies and sages—only then should you eat.   
“‘To eat in this fashion is neither to have the afﬂictions nor to transcend the afﬂictions, it is neither to enter into concentration nor to arise from concentration, it is neither to abide in the world nor to abide in nirvana.   
“‘Where there is charity, there are neither great nor small blessings, neither beneﬁt nor harm. This is the correct entry into the path of buddhahood, without relying on the śrāvaka[vehicle].   
“‘Kāśyapa, if you can eat according to this [understanding] then you will not render void the charity of those who feed you.’   

### Teisho

In the dojo, before we eat we chant sutras, recognizing that we receive our food from people in society in order to realize our training in its deepest way. We cannot be greedy—this is the teaching of our practice. As our practice continues, we have to make ongoing creative and inventive efforts to live according to our path—not living acccording to our desires but offering everything that we are and that we have to this path. Even if sometimes we are without the things we would prefer to eat, we will not go hungry. With our wisdom and with others’ kindness and offerings, we will be taken care of and receive blessings. If we are practicing our Path correctly, the necessary support will come to us without fail.

Before we eat our meals, we always make a saba offering. We do this remembering those who have no food that day, and also for those beings of no form who are nonetheless hungry in Mind. Only after making this offering do we ourselves eat. This is how we eat our meals in the dojo. Of course, we eat because we are hungry, and we are not trying to lose all desires for food. This is not about making our lives more difficult and then calling that practice. Rather, it is about eating humbly and not being greedy in satisfying our desires. Entering samadhi and forgetting society is not the point, nor is the point to enter society and forget our quiet within. The point is not to be drowned in society’s conditions, nor to drown in quietude and forget society’s needs. While not living in the midst of society, neither have we thrown away society. Every day we live in this way. This is the way of the Mahayana, the Path of the Mahayana, and this is the path to realize our true and original Mind. When we awaken to this we will naturally live in this way. 


{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[6][chapter 3]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
