---
# label: Calligraphy. 1
title: Sit straight and contemplate the true form of things
short_title: Sit straight and contemplate the true form of things
type: entry
weight: 109
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 9
---

### Sutra 
33. The Buddha told Upāli, “You go inquire about Vimalakīrti’s illness.”   
Upāli addressed the Buddha, “World-honored One, I dare not accept your instruction to go inquire about his illness. Why?   
“I remember once in the past, there were two bhikṣus who had violated the practice of the Vinaya but from their shame did not dare ask you about it. They came to ask me: ‘O Upāli, we have violated the Vinaya and are sincerely ashamed, not daring to ask the Buddha about it. We want you to explain our doubts and the [need for] repentance, so that we may be relieved of the transgressions.’ I immediately explained [the matter] to them according to the Dharma.   
  
34. “At the time Vimalakīrti came and said to me, “‘O Upāli, do not increase these two bhikṣus’ transgressions. You should just remove [the transgressions] and not disturb their minds. Why?   
“‘The nature of those transgressions does not reside within, it does not reside without, and it does not reside in the middle.   
“‘As the Buddha has explained, when their minds reside without, and it does not reside in the middle.   
“‘As the Buddha has explained, when their minds are deﬁled, sentient beings are deﬁled. When their minds are puriﬁed, sentient beings are puriﬁed. The mind likewise does not reside within, does not reside without, and does not reside in the middle. Just so is the mind, and just so are transgression and deﬁlement. The dharmas are also likewise, in not transcending suchness.   
“‘Just so, Upāli, when one attains emancipation using the characteristics of the mind, is it (i.e., the mind) deﬁled or not?’ I said, ‘It is not.’   
“Vimalakīrti said, ‘The characteristics of the minds of all sentient beings are likewise, in being without deﬁlement.   
  
35. “‘O Upāli, to have false concepts is deﬁlement; to be without false concepts is purity.   
“‘Confusion is deﬁlement, and the absence of confusion is purity. “‘To grasp the self is deﬁlement, and not to grasp the self is purity.   
“‘Upāli, all the dharmas are generated and extinguished, without abiding. Like phantasms or lightning bolts, the dharmas do not depend on each other. They do not abide even for a single instant. The dharmas are all false views, like a dream, like a mirage, like the moon [reﬂected] in water, like an image in a mirror—[all] generated from false conceptualization. Those who understand this are called “upholders of the Vinaya.” Those who understand this are said to “understand well.”’ 

### Teisho

Upali had been teaching two monks the practice of repenting, when along came Vimalakirti, saying that what Upali was teaching them was going to make things worse and lead to even more mistakes. Unless the monks saw the true source of their mistaken behavior, it was all useless. And then Vimalakirti taught Upali of the true repentance.

On top of having made a mistake, to bring forth the idea that there is an “I” who made the mistake is adding on yet another mistake. You have to teach people to recognize the source of their mistakes, or they will make an even bigger mistake; they will never truly apprehend their mind’s true base. In today’s world, where we generally punish mistakes, this is very hard to grasp. Vimalakirti is saying that what we need to do is not punish but educate.

Examining and reviewing our past behavior is essential to all religions. We are all constantly making mistakes and behaving unskillfully. So we declare our commitment to change our behavior in front of the Buddha. There is a particular repentance verse for this, and there is a way of chanting the names of all of the three thousand Buddhas, prostrating at each name, for a total of three thousand prostrations. It takes about one week to complete this ceremony. We chant the Buddha’s name while we put our forehead to the floor, bend our back, and actualize that repentance. In doing this, we declare and own our mistakes. This is what is called the repentance of form. 

But even though we actively repent with the body, the mind is the source of our mistaken behavior, and so we have to also repent our mind’s way of having expressed itself. The best way of doing this is zazen. If you want to truly review and change your behavior, then sit with a straight back, and sit free of any bit of obstruction in your clear mind. You then will realize how all mistaken behavior comes from a murky, occluded state of mind. This is like the clouds in the dark, dark sky. When the morning sun shines through those clouds, all the darkness is dispelled and everything becomes radiant. 
It is the same in our mind. When the true light of clarity comes, all the clouds and murkiness are dispelled. Zazen is not just about doing koans or sitting, but about clarifying our truest state of mind. This is about being in that clarified state of mind, from morning until night and night until morning in all the positions of sitting, standing, lying down, getting up, walking—all day long, we continue. This is what it is to live. This is zazen. 

{{< q-class "backmatter" >}}

## References
[7, 8, 9] [chapter 3]

## Bibliography

Taigan Sodo Roshi (Sodo Harada Roshi), Teisho on the Vimalakirti Sutra (volume 1), 2014, 

McRae, John (2004). The Sutra of Queen Śrīmālā of the Lion's Roar and the Vimalakīrti Sutra. Numata Center for Buddhist Translation and Research. ISBN 1886439311. (From Kumārajīva's Chinese and featuring short introduction, glossary, and minor notes)

{{< /q-class >}}
