---
title: On the purpose of this Sutra 
subtitle: 
weight: 4
type: splash
image: contributors/incenseRoshi.2012.jpg
---


The central teaching of the Mahayana, or Greater Vehicle, is for everyone to polish their wisdom, and while polishing one’s own wisdom to also guide others with the wisdom that is manifested. The Mahayana vehicle is for all to get on a ride together:  to create this great faith that we are endowed with this wisdom from the origin and that we work from it. We work from it by expressing it as that vow to put our life on the line for the realization of all beings. This was the strength of the Mahayana, which is to polish this wisdom deeply, and with that which we can know and see from that polished wisdom, to then bring that wisdom to all people. This is the way that it came to be and will continue into the future. And those who are of sincere and true devotion to wanting to keep this teaching going, proceed in this way to completely polish and fulfill the wisdom that is within us, and always keep our deepest vow of bringing an end to the suffering for all beings.

The Lotus Sutra teaches that this can be done by people who are working in society, having regular lives with families. It is for this reason that the Mahayana tradition has the approach that it can be done by everyone, not just by a few ordained people. All of us we are endowed with and hold this wisdom. The point is for it to be realized and then to live in accordance with it. First of all we have to clarify this wisdom, and then we learn how to live that truth in our daily lives, learn to work and create things without, for example, damaging the environment.

The source of all the problems is that we get caught on our ego-filter. Ego and ego-perspective—this is what undermines our efforts and makes things difficult. To be able to see what it is, to be in a world without being moved around by and ruled by this ego—that is what we must do.

This wisdom which is being taught here is the wisdom which appears to be two but which is not two separate things. As Dogen Zenji has written it poetically, “Foolish me! I’ll never become closer to the Buddha, just going further and further away.” We have to offer everything to society, and without being concerned about our own work, to instead bring what we realize through our wisdom to all beings. Jumping into that aspect of it, we purify everything. This is the teaching—the truth—of the Mahayana.

At the base of these many slogans is the deep wisdom of the Mahayana, as expressed here by the teachings of **Vimalakirti**. Vimalakirti, who was living in society in the midst of everyone living the life of society, was never caught by the things people are usually caught by—livelihood and family life. He was not clinging. He was always correcting others for being moved around, especially chiding the Buddha’s disciples, not just by criticizing and trying to improve them, but also in ways that would teach them to have a broader state of mind: that work of realizing the True-nature in every single thing we do. This was the functioning of the pure wisdom of Vimalakirti, who aptly had two other names, “Purest Name Bodhisattva,” and “No Defilement Bodhisattva.”

There are two other names for the Vimalakirti Sutra as well. One is “The Inconceivable Liberation Sutra” and the other is “The Rebirth Liberation Sutra”. These two names show how this sutra, in particular, goes beyond all of the paradoxes which it brings up, resolving them by becoming much more huge, expansive and embracing of the questions of the paradox and, in this way, making the truth come clear.

People in society usually put a great value on having money, but here Vimalakirti is placing that side by side with the value of living the truth, saying: look at the differences, look at the value of each. We can come to see how this is possible when we read the words in the section called “Liberation” —the Liberation section of this whole sutra which is also called the Liberation Sutra.

Some people want to drink sake, or they want to follow their own interests and impulses so they can get anything they want. Rather than getting caught like that on the views of a small ego and in that way separating from other beings, how much better to live in a way where we are using our life as a place of practice in every thing we do. Not caught on anything at all, we let go of our deepest attachments and see the place that is untouched by that clinging!

In society we need to bring to the fore our ability to offer ourselves for other people rather than trying to get what we personally prefer. To do that we have to know how to ‘kill’ our selfishness completely. But we are always getting caught by thinking of ourselves as a small self which is limited by ego and an ego view. Because we can’t let go of that, we get caught and choked by some narrow vision of who we mistakenly think we are. To let go of that we have to do zazen and learn to not be moved around by always thinking about how others are regarding us. And we do zazen to learn to discard the small self version of what we think we are and what we think we want most—let go of that for a bigger picture which is more true. 

We do zazen so that we are not caught by and stuck on this limited egoistic version of ourself as a human body and to see that we are not small-minded. We have to do zazen so that we are also not limiting other people.  and to see that. We imagine a version of our human life as the person who is alive between a certain birth and a certain death; we imagine this is who we are. Through zazen we come to see that while this is one part of it, there is a much greater part as well; we are not limited by something called being born and dying.

{{< q-figure src="contributors/incenseRoshi.2012.jpg" class="is-pulled-left" >}}

We have to ‘kill’ our small, egoistic self completely in order to let go of that stuck, ego view. All of the ancients passed through this, and we, too, have to free uourselves from our egoistic view and awaken to what is best for everyone! For doing this we have to die and be reborn in a completely true way. If we can die totally in this way, then we can see the place of rebirth. We have to push ourselves into it, to dig in and actually die completely in order to be able to understand and realize that name of this text which is called “The Inconceivable Rebirth.”

Buddhism is not for making me stronger, for making one’s own self-centered, egoistic view more central. It is to become the person who is not moved around by anything that anyone says to us. It is only in not becoming that person that we are insufficient. To see what we can do when people are criticizing us or putting us down—to what degree can we not be moved around by that whatsoever—to see this place beyond our egoistic perception where we’re not caught on ourselves as what is being talked to and what is being put down, to step away from that and know that that is not the whole picture—it is for this that we do our practice.

To live in a world where there are the phenomena of birth and death without being caught on those phenomena whatsoever, to always be smiling in spite of that, to not be clinging to that piece of the whole picture. To know failure, to know success, to know winning, to know losing without being caught on any of them—this is truly Inconceivable Liberation. As long as we are alive, we have desires; we have things that are affecting our body.  While experiencing all of that, to not be upset or caught on any of it in an egoistic way—this is truly the Inconceivable Liberation.

Vimalakirti’s sutra today would perhaps be called something like an opera or a drama with all kinds of props, all kinds of scenes, all kinds of characters. We have the Buddha coming in, bodhisattvas, devils, heavenly angels, all coming and going in order to suddenly awaken us. It may seem like an opera right in front of us, but in this way we can see the truth and suddenly become awakened in a new way.

This opening section is about letting go of the small self. So how do we do that? This is what Zen is teaching us; it is that teaching that makes us know how important it is to let go and let go and let go of it right now. All people have this ego-attachment. It’s very strong, even in children and in old people. It is most deeply set there, in their wanting to have what they want the most. But we know that we have to get old. To let go of that ego view right now, while we are still young! 